You are actively rewiring your brain for
the worst by engaging with social media,
high volume, quick videos.
>> And the social media executives don't
let their kids use this stuff because
they designed it to be addictive and
they know that millions and millions of
kids have been cyberbullied, sexed. Many
have committed suicide. So, I'm getting
angry.
>> And then from the medical perspective,
it's rewiring your body, increasing your
risk of heart disease and PTSD.
>> We've moved too far into the virtual
world and the results are catastrophic.
People are spending roughly about 6 and
a half hours a day on their phones. What
do we do about this?
>> Well, here's the amazing thing. We
actually can control our fate. So, we
are joined by a social psychologist and
a Harvard physician
>> to dive into the technology addiction
and brain rot crisis billions are facing
worldwide
>> and how we can counter its devastating
mental health effects. You have to
reclaim your attention because without
the ability to pay attention for several
minutes at a time, we're seeing the
destruction of human potential, the
human relationships, the connection.
>> But there's all these small tweaks that
you can do to override that primal urge
to scroll. For example, 91% of people
had an improvement in attention,
well-being, and mental health. After
just 2 weeks of continuing to use your
device, but not having internet access.
Next, keep your phone out of your arms
reach because the sheer potential for
distraction has actually been shown to
change your prefrontal cortex, which is
called brain drain.
>> So, yes, we should exert more
self-control, but we're being pushed in
addictive apps and it's messing us all
up. That's not our fault.
>> Would you advise people to delete these
short form videos?
>> Oh my god, yes, that would the most
important thing you can do for your
intelligence and for humanity. But if I
was going to offer some specific advice,
here are the three things that I do with
my students to reclaim retention. And
then to add to that, I have the 3se
secondond brain reset. So, first
>> I wanted to ask you guys what you
thought of this.
>> Hey, you're back.
>> This terrifies me.
>> We've got to stop this now.
>> Guys, I've got a quick favor to ask you.
We're approaching a significant
subscriber milestone on this show, and
roughly 69% of you that listen and love
this show haven't yet subscribed for
whatever reason. If there was ever a
time for you to do us a favor, if we've
ever done anything for you, given you
value in any way, it is simply hitting
that subscribe button. And it means so
much to myself, but also to my team, cuz
when we hit these milestones, we go away
as a team and celebrate. And it's the
thing, the simple, free, easy thing you
can do to help make this show a little
bit better every single week. So, that's
a favor I would ask you. And, um, if you
do hit the subscribe button, I won't let
you down. And we'll continue to find
small ways to make this whole production
better. Thank you so much for being part
of this journey. Means the world. And uh
yeah, let's do this.
Jonathan editing.
Jonathan, I've heard you say that the
destruction of attention is the largest
threat to humanity that's happening
around the world. And I've also heard
you say that short form videos are the
worst of the worst because they're
shattering attention spans. The reason
why I wanted to have this conversation
today is somewhat personal. And in fact,
all of the conversations have in the
driver are somewhat personal to some
degree. um they're inspired by some
unanswered question I have in my head
and also some observation I have in my
life and the observation I've had is
that short form videos in particular are
making my life worse and actually I've
got to say the catalyst moment really
where I thought you know I need to get
you exceptional people together to have
this conversation was I thought this I
then looked at my screen time and saw a
huge change I felt so much worse because
all these social platforms have short
form video now and then I actually heard
Elon Musk who you know has a social
media platform that does short form
video say that he thinks it's one of the
worst inventions for humanity.
>> Jonathan, why did you say what you said
about short form video and this
corruption of attention?
>> Yeah, because I wrote a whole book
called The Anxious Generation focusing
on teen mental health. That was the
mystery that popped up in the mid200s.
Why are people born after 1995 so much
more anxious and depressed? And I've
been tracking down that mystery and it
points a lot of it points to social
media and especially Instagram, social
comparison, all the things we know about
social media. When the book came out in
2024, since then what I realized is that
I vastly underestimated the damage
because I focused on mental health,
which is a catastrophe. But the bigger
damage is the destruction of the human
ability to pay attention. Without the
ability to pay attention for several
minutes at a time, ideally 10 or 20
minutes at a time. Without that, you're
not going to be of much use as an
employee. You're not going to be of much
use as a spouse. You're not going to be
successful in life. And that's when I
realized this is way beyond mental
health. This is changing human
cognition, changing human attention, and
possibly on a global scale.
Adi, what perspective do you come at
this from? And what's been your
perspective through all the work you've
done about brains and stress and
neuroscience and all these kinds of
things that has shaped the way that you
think about social media, screen time,
short form video.
>> My background is that I'm a physician at
Harvard and it my expertise is in
stress, burnout, and mental health. And
so that is the lens that I view all of
this through. We know that the most
delletterious relationship that you have
is with your device. You know, in every
healthy relationship, we have
boundaries. We have boundaries with our
kids, our parents, our colleagues, our,
you know, wi-i with our friends. And
yet, we have no boundaries and often
poorest boundaries when it comes to the
relationship you have with your device.
So, it's not so much about, you know,
becoming a digital monk and renouncing
technology because technology can serve
us, right? It inspires, educates,
connects. Now more than ever, it's so
important to be an informed citizen, but
not at the expense of your mental
health. And so what Jonathan was saying,
this, you know, constant being engaged
with your devices, with social media,
the scrolling from the minute you wake
up until you go to bed, there's a reason
why you have your best ideas in the
shower. And that's because that's the
only place in the whole day where you
are not with your device. People take
their device to the bathroom. They sleep
with your device. you eat with your
device, people walk down the street.
There's more near miss pedestrian
accidents because people are walking
while they're crossing the street and um
looking at their devices. And so there's
all of this brain biology at play behind
the scenes. So both of you have talked
about how it doesn't feel good to engage
and constantly be on your phone, that
sense of infinite scroll, but there is,
you know, it feels like you're doing
nothing. You're just doing this, right?
What are you doing? But in fact, it is
not passive. It is active. And it has a
profound effect on your biology, on your
brain, on your psychology, and also
social factors that I hope we talk about
today.
>> You know, scrolling, wasting a bit of
time doesn't seem so harmful.
What is the big, if we play this forward
10, 20, 30 years, what is the big risk
or threat? The biggest threat right now,
we don't even have to wait 20 years, is
that it through a process called
neuroplasticity, which is just a big
fancy word that simply means that your
brain is a muscle, is that by engaging
with social media, that that sense of
high volume, lowquality, quick videos,
you are actively rewiring your brain for
the worse. So you're increasing your
sense of stress, worsening your mental
health, attention, cognition,
distractability, irritability, complex
problem solving. All of that changes
when you engage in engage in that
infinite scroll.
>> Yeah. I'd like to add on here because
one of the main arguments I get is, ah,
this is what they said about television.
Oh, this is what they said about comic
books. This is just another moral panic.
But people need to understand why
touchscreen devices are so different
from television. And so I think parents
find this helpful if I just lay this out
briefly. Good screen time versus bad
screen time. So humans are storytelling
animals. We have always, as long as
we've had language, we've raised our
kids with stories, epic poems, all kinds
of stories. Stories are good. Sto the
human brain needs lots of patterns. The
child's brain needs lots of patterns to
develop. So the worst thing you can do
is hand your child the device because
they're crying for it because they've
been they trained to get it and you're
busy. So you have hand them the device.
They're quiet. What's happening? They're
sitting alone. Not, you know, when I was
a kid, we always watch with my sisters,
with my friends. You're arguing about
it. You're talking at social kids
sitting alone with a device in his hand.
It's not long stories. It's never long
stories. It always ends up at YouTube
shorts or Tik Tok or Instagram reels for
older kids. So, they're doing they're
doing this. But here's the key thing
that it does that a television does not.
A television puts you in a state that
psychologists call transportation. You
get into a story and you find yourself
pulled in and you're rooting for the
characters and this is this is how a
brain gets tuned up to social patterns
but it can't happen in 10 seconds. It
can't happen in one minute. It takes a
long period of time and there is no
reinforcement. There is no the
television doesn't do anything to you.
You don't have any response. Whereas a
touchscreen device is a Skinner box. So
BF Skinner was one of the founders of
behaviorism and he put rats and pigeons
in a box where he could deliver a
reinforcement, a little grain of food on
a schedule. And by giving them quick
reinforcements for behavior, he could
train them to do amazing tricks in just
a few hours. When you give your kid a
touchscreen device, it's stimulus
response, swipe, get a reward or not,
variable ratio. And then and and you
just keep doing that. So you are, as Adi
said, it is rewiring your brain. It's
not just wasting time. It is literally
training you to do things where
television didn't do that. So this is a
whole new game.
>> And to add to that, you know, from the
medical perspective, you're shortening
this attention span. And what happens
over time is so like Jonathan said,
right, you're not sleeping as well
because you are engaged with your
device. We know that 80% of people are
checking their phones within minutes of
waking up. We have something called
revenge bedtime procrastination. this
concept of, you know, at the end of the
day you're fatigued, you've had a long
day, you've had no me time, and you want
to get to bed early. We all know, by the
way, what the data is that, you know,
we've been taught since we were little
kids, right? Like bedtime, sleep is
important, it's good for your body, it's
good for your brain. And we might have
all the knowledge in the world, but in
terms of action, there's a wide gap
between knowledge and information and
action. And so revenge, bedtime
procrastination is kind of an offshoot.
So what happens? So, you know, you have
that decreased attention. You have that
irritability, hypervigilance. And so, at
night, at the end of the day, it's 9:00
p.m. You finally, you know, if you're a
parent, your kids are asleep, your
kitchen is clean, maybe you finish your
entrepreneurial day, and you finally sit
down with Melanie on the couch, and
you're like, "H, some me time." And, you
know, you want to get to bed early, and
you know it's good for you. But then
suddenly, you're scrolling and before
you know it, it's 2 a.m. and you're
saying, "Oh my god, what happened? Why
am I still awake? What was I doing all
this time?" What happens is that you
essentially give yourself some me time
at night and so you procrastinate
bedtime. And so what happens is with
this revenge bedtime procrastination, it
affects your sleep and then when you
don't have good sleep, good quality
sleep, so you have difficulty falling
asleep, staying asleep, sleep debt over
time for kids, for adults has all sorts
of ramifications. So this is just the
tip of the iceberg. this short form
video content and the ripple effects go
far and wide. Not only is it rewiring
your brain, it's rewiring your body, it
is affecting your sleep, which increases
your risk of heart disease later in
life. And u when you're consuming
graphic videos and graphic images, it
can increase your personal risk of PTSD
through vicarious trauma even if you
weren't there. So, this is just a vast
network of things that can happen to you
simply because you're thinking, "Yeah,
it's harmless. What is it? It's just a
bunch of videos that I'm checking out.
It's a way for me to decompress."
>> What do I need to know about the nature
of the brain to understand exactly what
short form video is is playing, is
hijacking, is taking advantage of
>> the thing to understand about all of
this is that we have to focus on
childhood. Why do we have childhood? Um,
humans have this really interesting
childhood where we we grow rapidly at
first and then we slow down for about
five or seven years. We don't grow very
quickly and then we speed up at puberty.
Whereas other primates, they just grow
and grow till they reach reproductive
age, then they reproduce. But we seem to
have this long period of sort of middle
childhood for cultural learning. It's a
period in which the the kid is now
walking and talking and turning away
from the parents and and that's a time
for this to come in and they pay
attention and they form relationships.
All these things have to happen slowly
because the neurons are gradually
growing. They're finding each other
based on what the child is doing. Okay?
So, we grow up in the real world and and
that happens over time. And a lot of
that is very physical. Kids are very
physical. Mammals are very physical and
there's a lot of touch. So, that's a
healthy human childhood. But when you
give an iPad or your old iPhone
and they can they begin doing the the
touching and swiping, that is going to
hijack their attention. That is going to
push out all other forms of action and
learning. And that is going to change
the way the parts of the brain that
learn to pay attention, what's called
executive function. It's going to change
the way the brain learns to pay
attention. It's going to change the
reward circuits. I think you had Analy
recently who's the nation's expert on
addiction. And the way that she
describes it, how, you know, any one
addiction is going to change your reward
pathways to make you more vulnerable to
other addictions. So, we're setting our
kids up not just for this, but then when
they get a little older, it'll be video
games, it'll be uh porn, it'll be
gambling now. Everything is gambling.
So, we're setting them up for a life in
which their brain is saying, "Give me
something. Give me some quick dopamine.
Give me some quick dopamine. I don't
want I don't want to have to work for
anything. I don't want to have to apply
myself for an hour and then get a
reward."
And so the what the what the short
videos are doing for kids is preventing
them from learning the connection
between hard work and a reward. Is there
anything else I need to know from a
neuroscience perspective about what's
going on in my brain when I'm when I
develop these addictions with short form
videos or these sort of quick dopamineic
tasks.
>> So we all as humans have a primal urge
to scroll. When you feel a sense of
stress, as many of us do in this moment
in life, it is your sense, you know,
your amygdala. And so it's your sense of
self-preservation. It's survival and
self-preservation. That is what your
amydala does. So if you want me to show
you here, I have no idea what I'm doing
there.
>> Yeah, it's okay. So here, deep here,
it's a small almond shaped structure.
And that is your amygdala. And your
amygdala, its main purpose is survival
and self-preservation. It houses your
stress response, your fight orflight
response, and it is truly what is
activated when you are engaging in
content, when you feel a sense of
stress. And so you have this primal urge
to scroll. And so evolutionarily we when
we all were caves people living um
together, we would sleep at night and
there would be a night watchman scanning
for danger. And now we have our we have
become our own night watchman. And so we
scan for danger all day, all night long.
How do we do that? We scroll. And then
the amydala is triggered. And then you
scroll some more. And you scroll some
more. And you scroll some more. And so
over time, what you're doing is that
you're making that amygdala in a state
of of chronic. It's continually being
triggered. What happens to the amygdala
over time. When it's continually
triggered, it starts to rewire your
brain in other ways. And how does it do
that? Through something called the
prefrontal cortex. If you put your hand
I like I can use this model, but I can
also just use my hands. When you put
your hand on your forehead, the area
right behind your forehead right here is
the prefrontal cortex. This is a very
important thing for our conversation.
This area of the brain and what the
prefrontal cortex does is it is called
it governs executive functions. So
impulse control, memory, planning,
organization, strategic thinking,
complex problem solving and there is a
tension between your amygdala and the
prefrontal cortex. When your amydala is
in the driver's seat, that prefrontal
cortex is quiet. And what is happening
as we continue to engage with our
devices and have this primal urge to
scroll, that amydala upregulates and the
prefrontal cortex downregulates. And
over time, that is very problematic for
all of the reasons that we're kind of
introducing at the start of this
conversation. There was a meta analysis
done in 2025 of 71 different studies and
it found that heavy short form video use
was associated with reduced thinking
ability, especially shorter attention
spans and weaker impulse control.
>> That's right. These studies are just
beginning to roll in now. Um, kids have
been on social media really a lot since
2008, but especially once they got
smartphones around 2012. studies began
coming in uh in the 2010s that um look
it's looking like the kids who are spend
a lot of time on this um are doing much
worse. They're more depressed. The focus
was on depression. And some other
researchers said no, it's just a
correlation. You you can't prove
causation. And we've been going around
and around on this for about 10 or 15
years. Now we're doing the same thing
with uh with the short form videos. The
damage everyone can see. My students
tell me this is what's happening. We
feel it. studies are coming in, but
there will be a few studies here and
there that don't show it and people will
uh push that up. Meta spends a lot of
time and money to influence the public
debate. A lot of public documents are
coming out now about how they do that.
So, we can engage in debate over over
research on short form videos for 5 or
10 years, but at that point, it's way
too late. We've lost a second
generation, Gen Alpha. So, I think when
we're talking about kids especially, we
need to have what's called the
precautionary principle, which is if
there's reason to think that this is
hurting kids, how about we don't roll it
out into every childhood? How about we
make these companies responsible? We
hold them responsible for what they're
doing to kids because we're about to
make the same mistake we made with
social media, letting it worm its way
into childhood. We have already done
that with short videos, and we're about
to do it with AI chat bots. In fact,
we're just beginning it in late 2025,
I'd say. I I don't think people quite
realize how much these major social
media platforms have figured out that
short form video sells. Um we're
actually seeing this sort of global rise
in short form drama apps now. And I
don't know if you guys have seen these
apps, but it basically takes a movie
that used to be 2 hours long and it
breaks it down into say 60 different
parts. And my a colleague of mine at my
company was showing me the other day in
different parts of the world they're
exploding. There's been a 190% increase
in short form drama apps. takes long
form movie, turns it into short form
videos. Disney Plus plans to introduce
AI generated short form videos this
year, starting with 30 secondond limits
inside the Disney Plus app. And
Techrunch also reported that as of
October 2025, Netflix tested short form
video content on phones and recently
announced its plan to expand this
feature. It appears that all of the
content we consume is going that way.
And listen, I'm friends with lots of
people at big social media platforms. um
this doesn't get me in the doesn't sound
in my way of criticizing them because I
think two things can be true at the same
time right so I think it can be true
that I have a podcast and I make short
form videos and that I also understand
that there's a real downside to them and
um all of the major social social media
platforms that I speak to speak to have
a huge drive towards short form video it
is it appears to be their number one
strategic priority and obviously because
of the success of Tik Tok as of January
2026 Tik Tok I believe is the most
downloaded social app in the world now
and it and and if I'm running a social
media company and my one focus is
profit,
>> I'm now faced with an existential
crisis.
>> Yeah.
>> I either take part in this thing that is
driving the highest retention, therefore
the best ad payouts or I die.
>> So there's two comments to that. first
off is that you know when we think when
we think about social media and how
society is shapeshifting to allow this
short form content there is a concept
that Jonathan and I briefly mentioned I
think prior to us filming called second
screen viewing and so what's happening
is that allegedly these big streamers
are asking their creative talent whether
it's screenwriters or actors or pe
directors to replay to reiterate the
plot because as you're watching, you
know, when we were kids, we would watch
TV or movies and you just sit on the
couch and you'd have a bucket of popcorn
with your family and you'd watch a
movie, an hour, hour and a half, two
hours and now second screen viewing is
happening, which means that you're
watching a movie or a TV show and you're
on your device and so you are constantly
having that fragmented attention and we
are all doing it and so what these
streamers are allegedly asking their
creative talent to do is to reiterate
the plot. So it's shapeshifting. It
makes sense if my brain is, you know,
I'm 33 years old, so I've grown up with
a lot of this stuff. If my brain has
been wired to have shorter attention
spans and and movies from 30 years ago
are not going to cut it for me,
>> right? But then look what happens if if
everybody chases that. And I know, look,
Netflix is making shorter and shorter
stuff. Even TED, the TED conference, TED
talks are getting shorter and shorter.
What does that do? It just repeats the
cycle. Now, I appreciate that you're in
a collective action trap, as you put it.
If I don't do it and everyone else is,
then I lose out. And so, the the
business pressure on on all the
creators, the business pressures go
shorter, shorter, shorter. There's a
very useful psychological term
distinction here that I think would be
helpful, which is the difference between
psychological assimilation and
accommodation. This goes back to Jean
PG, the great developmental
psychologist. We we have certain mental
structures. We have a a model in our
head of how things work. And you know
then you learn something new then oh
that's a you know kid learns oh that's a
an arvar okay I put that into you know
that's just that you just assimilate
they learn lots of animal names and then
they learn something that's doesn't fit
like you learn about bacteria and now
you have to oh okay now you you have you
have to change your mental structure it
takes a little time you change your
mental structure to understand more
about life that's what education really
is all about you have to have a lot of
assimilation of course but you need that
accommodation over and over again That's
why you want to go to college. That's
why you want to read novels. That's what
a great movie does. It takes time. And
so, one of the great things about this
modern technology is that we can do
things like have this three-hour
conversation. I can't believe it. People
are going to listen to it. So, this, you
know, long form content. This is all
about accommodation. Anybody who walks
out who who who leaves this conversation
after 3 hours and isn't thinking about
something differently, we failed. Okay.
So, you are very much in the
accommodation business. That's great.
And then the the question both a moral
and a strategic question is how much do
you need to play the the quick hit game
in order to get people there. I leave
that to you to do the moral calculation.
Maybe it maybe it balances out maybe but
uh but I think that's where you are.
>> Would you advise people to delete these
short form?
>> Oh my god. Yes. Of course. Here but
here. Yes. That would the most important
thing you can do for your intelligence
and for humanity would be delete them.
So, what I advise my students to do is I
say just do this. Just just delete one
of the social media apps that you use,
especially if it's Tik Tok, just delete
from your phone. You can still check on
your computer. If someone sends you a
video, you can still watch it on your
computer. You can even check it, you
know, every weekend. You can spend some
time on it, but just get it off your
phone because on the phone, the phone is
always with us. It's an extension of our
body. And if it's always there, then
it's going to take every it's called
attention fracking. It's going to break
up your attention. It's going to take
every 7 seconds that you're not doing
something, you're going to go for the
phone. So, the best thing you can do to
make yourself smarter and a better
partner and a better human, I would say,
would be to delete the short, especially
any of the short form videos. So, Tik
Tok, unfortunately, YouTube, which has a
lot of good stuff on it, becomes YouTube
shorts. Instagram, which does a lot of
terrible things, but people do find it
useful for all kinds of purposes,
becomes Instagram reels. So, I think the
proper amount of short form video for
children 0 to 18 is zero. They should
never be watching the vertical videos.
Parents, don't ever let your kids watch
the short vertical videos. You might
even if there if only there was a way to
put it. Is there a way to put a time
limit? You can say it has to be 10
minutes or longer. Kids, you can have an
hour YouTube, but it has to be 10
minutes or longer. Nothing shorter than
10 minutes. That at least will get rid
of this the quick the quick swiping the
the dopamine stuff. So I would say that
for kids yes like you know not engaging
it whatsoever but for someone you know
my approach is a little bit different
for someone who's like in their 30s or
in their 40s and the way I would kind of
frame that is
instead of renouncing you know saying
I'm going to get it off my device and
I'm going to check on a desktop which is
great there's c little kind of tweaks
that we could do because my approach is
to foster that sense of empowerment in
one to help them make positive change.
And so one strategy that you could use
if you are saying there's no way I'm
getting rid of my I'm not deleting these
apps from my phone, right? If you're by
the way, I practice what I preach and I
really do don't engage in technology as
to the best of my ability. Um but one
thing that you could do is grayscale
your phone. And so especially at night
like it's 9:00 p.m. like we talked about
revenge bedtime procrastination. You
know that you're going to do it. you're
going to sit down and you're going to
scroll and before you know it, it's 2
am. Instead, grayscale your phone. This
simple switch. You can toggle it. I have
my phone set to grayscale, which simply
means that you're getting rid of your
color, making it black and white. And
so, when it is grayscaled, then you, you
know, it doesn't have that same
addictive quality to it. It's like going
through a grocery store. A marketing
executive described it this way to me.
Going through a grocery store instead of
the technicolor junk food cereal, it's
just black and white. So you have a less
there's a greater sense of compulsion to
continue checking. So that's like one
strategy you could use. And the other is
to set some boundaries. So geographical
boundaries, keep your phone out of out
of your arms reach if you're at a desk
if you're a student, not right next to
you because we know there's this
phenomenon of brain drain. So it's not
just that when you're using your phone,
it can have a potential distraction, but
also just having it close by. It's
called brain drain. And um so putting it
in a desk drawer, keeping it in another
part of the home if you are working,
keeping it far away from you. And so you
kind of can override that primal urge to
scroll, let your prefrontal cortex take
hold again. And so there's all these
small tweaks that you can do. You you
think no.
>> Yes, there are all these small tweaks
you can do and they will make the heroin
a little bit less addictive. And yeah,
you should try those. But what I can say
after teaching this course for many
years is that people who try that, they
they report, "Yeah, you know, it helped.
it helped, but you only really get the
transformation when you quit social
media that you get your life back. You
get hours a day back. So, um, and so I I
would urge everyone to just think, you
know, you only you only get one
childhood, you only get one one young
adulthood, and if you're going to spend
it scrolling, what do you have to show
for it at the end? And when you get
people to reflect on, well, how much
value do you really get from watching
the short videos? What would how would
your life be different if you if you
knocked it out? Once they realize that
their motives for being on it were
either just to keep up or because that's
what everyone else is doing or as you
said, I deserve it because I'm tired.
Well, why are you tired? It's in part
because your attention was fragmented
all day long. So, you only really get
the transformations when you get a real
change in what you're what you're
consuming. Although, of course, yes,
setting it to grace will be helpful, but
it's not going to be transformative for
most people, I believe. And then you
know based on the science you're there's
certain elements like when we think
about what is it about the phone that is
creating that sense of compulsion.
Jonathan is right. So what is it about
the phone? It's not just the phone you
know you're scrolling you're engaging.
There are two studies that were really
interesting. One people got off of they
they continue to use their devices. They
had no internet. So it's like you know I
tried this experiment myself in
December. I was out of the country and
so I just let my, you know, I didn't
plug into Wi-Fi and I found, you know,
marketkedly a marketked change in my
mood, my sleep and I'm not even, you
know, 20 years old on TikTok and it was
so different. And so this study found
that just two weeks of continuing to use
your device, but just not having
internet access improved your attention,
well-being, and mental health. And in
this population, it was all adults, it
wasn't kids, it was all adults. found
that 91% of people had an improvement in
at least one of these metrics. And then
another study more recently um just one
week of not engaging in social media,
digital detox they called it, did the
same thing. Better you know less
anxiety, less depression,
decreased insomnia. But my feeling is
that you know there is this new kind of
meme right like your the millennial urge
to delete uh my internet presence and
you know live off the grid. There is
certainly utility to that and I salute
anyone who wants to engage in that
analog life more and more but from my
from where I sit I feel like we do need
to have healthier boundaries and engage
more responsibly. It also builds up that
muscle and it can help, you know, takes
eight weeks to do neuroplasticity. When
you're building new brain circuits, it
takes eight weeks. Falling off, getting
back up is part of habit formation. So,
if you're going to make any of these
changes, understand that it takes some
time. But I I don't know if it is
possible for me or for others to say
fully, I'm going to, you know, delete
off of my phone. But I love that. So,
I'd like to go a little further um a
little further with this. So, the way
you the way you put it, yes, there's all
these things that we could do. We should
have boundaries, but all of that puts
the responsibility on us.
>> Agree.
>> And that's where we are with junk food.
With junk food, we're like, okay, it's
out there. We have to learn
self-control. We have to teach
self-control to our kids. Okay, that's
the way it is in this country. But the
digital devices, I think, are very, very
different. So, imagine if imagine if we
sent our kids out into the world and it
wasn't just that there was junk food in
all the stores. was that everything was
made of junk food. You know, you you
know, the door handles, you can eat it.
It's chocolate. But it's not just that
the world's made of junk food. It's they
actually can tell they're able to tell
what you're craving at the moment. And
maybe you're you're more in the mood for
salt. So So now it's all potato chips or
pretzels. If the world is designed by
companies to always give you the thing
that will most grab your unconscious
desires, will affect the the amydala,
the reward centers,
that's on them. That's not our fault. My
general rule as a social psychologist is
if a few people are doing something bad
or self-destructive, well, you know,
they should learn some self-control or
that's something about them. But when 90
or 95% of people are doing something
self-destructive,
that's because of the companies that put
us in an environment that encourages
addiction. So, I just want to read a
quote. We have so much good stuff coming
out from Meta, from all the
whistleblowers. Now, all the court cases
are beginning in Los Angeles. finally
the first time they're going to Meta is
going to face a jury with all the
parents who've lost kids. Um, so here is
here's a a chat. So, we have a lot of
internal documents that came out from
the the attorneys general that are suing
Meta. So, while they're talking about
the results of some of their internal
research, one of them says, uh, "Oh my
gosh, y'all, Instagram is a drug. We're
basically pushers. We're causing reward
deficit disorder because people are
binging on in Instagram so much they
can't feel reward anymore." which is
something Anna LMKI said like the reward
tolerance is so high and then he says I
know Adam meaning Adam Oeri I know Adam
doesn't want to hear it he freaked out
when I talked about dopamine in my teen
fundamentals leads review but it is
undeniable it's biological and
psychological top-down directives drive
it all towards making sure people keep
coming back for more. This is not on us.
They designed it to be addictive.
They've done research to make it
maximally addictive. They push it on
children. They tried to get Instagram
kids for even littleer kids. They know
what they're doing. They've done the
research. My team, we put together. We
found references to 31 internal studies
that Meta did. They've done a lot of
research finding harm. They bury it, but
you can find it at meta's internal
research.org. We put it all online. You
can read these quotes. So, yes, we
should exert more self-control, but
basically we're being pushed addictive
substances, addictive uh addictive apps,
and it's messing us all up.
>> I agree wholeheartedly that it is so
destructive, and you feel like even with
people in their 40s and 50s, and if
anyone can do it, it's you, Jonathan.
Seriously, I would love to see it. You
know, we also know based on the data
that these things quite they they
reshape our brain, rewire our brain
through neuroplasticity and also change
our brain waves. So patterns. So we
talked about the amydala and the
prefrontal cortex, right? But they also
change brain waves. And so when you look
at studies and the data, it has the
reward pathway and dopamine. And these
brain patterns, the brain waves mimic
addictive behaviors. And you know that
there's certain features, right? like
when you do swipe down to refresh, it's
the slot machine.
>> It was modeled directly after the slot
machine. Yeah.
>> Or autoplay or um you know the algorithm
that infinite scroll. Um one really
interesting kind of like breaking news
which you guys may have already heard
of. It's like 3 days ago the European
Union Commission found Tik Tok to be in
breach of the digital services act. And
what it said was that it is addictive.
it um you know creates compulsion and
gets people into this autopilot mode so
they have difficulty disengaging and
personally I am moving away from social
media and really leaning into analog
life but I think with the way the world
you know it's one of our only ways to
connect right meaning I don't mean
connect deeply
I don't mean connect like in a deep way
but be informed to know what's going on
in the world etc
>> I I suspect that because we've spent so
long criticizing meta over the last 10
years because the biggest in any
category takes all the heat. So, OpenAI
is taking it now. And what this often
does is is it provides cover for other
people to go be even more extreme with
that behavior while like meta take the
heat. And I actually think this is how
Tik Tok came to be.
>> Tik Tok had basically originally started
as musically became Tik Tok. They had
they were take they were taking no heat.
Um, so they they created an algorithm
which is the equivalent of like crack
cocaine. The reason why I have a Tik Tok
account. I don't have the app on my
phone. I have never had the app on my
phone. I don't I don't was because I I
noticed that the view variance on Tik
Tok was like no other platform. What I
mean by that is you can have a million
followers on Tik Tok and you can get
10,000 views or you can get 10 million
views. In the 15 years that I've been on
social media, building social media
businesses, I'd never seen this before.
And what it indicated to me is that the
algorithm was being an even more
aggressive sorting hat or retention
machine.
>> What to push up, what to push down.
>> Yeah.
>> And so, like, when I started in social
media in 2014,
if I had a million followers, I might
get a million views or maybe 800,000. I
did some research the other day on all
of our social channels over time and
what we're seeing is the variance in the
amount of views we can get is increasing
which means the algorithm is doing more
work to say show everyone this. I don't
care if the person that posted it is
called Jenny and has seven followers and
show no one this. I don't care if it's
Steven who has a million followers or
whatever. And I realized that Tik Tok
was was way ahead of everybody here. And
that's why they are the most addictive,
the fastest growing platform. I say all
this to say that even if meta shut down
tomorrow,
someone else would seize the opportunity
if there isn't sort of policy, I I guess
>> in place.
>> That's right.
>> Would you be whack-a-ole, right?
>> Yeah. No, that's right. And so, you
know, in terms of who's done the damage
to kids, Meta is the big fish via
Instagram. And they're also the main
player in terms of spending a huge
amount of money to lobby Congress and ch
and block laws. They're also the main
player in buying up civil society
organizations, giving money to
organizations, the national PTA, all
sorts of organizations. They get to then
give a message on digital citizenship or
digital health. So, Meta really is the
major driver. Meta is the tobacco
industry here trying to change the the
dialogue. But in terms of the products,
um, Snapchat is probably more deadly in
terms of the actual number of deaths per
user because Snapchat is not it's not
making you depressed by social
comparison as much. Snapchat is
introducing you to all kinds of people
and it's the main way that drug dealers
and and extortionists find kids.
Snapchat has a quick ad feature which
relentlessly pushes you to connect with
friends of friends. So once a man can
get any f any kid in a school, now he
can get connected to all the kids in the
school. So, uh, when we in a lot of the
court cases, you know, when you have you
have suicides from cyber bullying, you
have drug overdoses from, you know, a
kid bought a Xanax, but it had fentinel
in it. So, Snapchat at Snapchat in TW in
in 2022, we know from their internal
documents, from the lawsuits, they were
getting 10,000 reports of sextortion
from their users, not a year, every
month. And that's just what was
reported, which is the tip of the
iceberg. So, Snapchat is a terrible
platform for children to be on. It
should be an adult-only platform. You're
talking with strangers around the world
and and on with disappearing messages
and Snapchat doesn't even keep a record.
It is ideal for sextortion. There's even
a handbook how to stor kids on Snapchat.
It goes around the world and and
criminal organizations use it. So, uh so
I definitely don't want to let Snapchat
off. Tik Tok of course is a Chinese
company. Uh I mean nominally we'll see
if it if that's changed but it was a
Chinese company that gave its Chinese
kids got healthy Tik Tok or doyen and
they got they got they they you know
learned to follow astronauts and they
gave us the their their algorithm feeds
their kid patriotic stuff. Um it shuts
off at a certain time at night. There's
all kinds of limits. So the people make
the technology generally want to protect
their own kids and they want other kids
to use it. That's what Tik Tok is doing
in China. They want American kids to rot
in hell, but they want their kids to
grow up with the ability to focus. And
it's the same thing with the tech guys
in in in Silicon Valley. They don't let
their kids use this stuff. They make
their nannies sign contracts that they
will not let the kid have a phone. They
will not expose the kid to that. They
send their kids to schools like the
Waldorf school that precisely because
there are no computers or tech in the
classroom. So once again, we see their
reveal behavior. They know they designed
it to be addictive. They know it's
addictive. They don't let their kids use
it. they want your kids to use it. Um,
so I think that's where we are.
>> And how does AI
>> oh
>> become a protagonist in the story?
>> So my my work is now focused on AI
chatbots, mental health, and the human
connection. We haven't yet kind of
delved into loneliness, but there's this
unmet need for human connection, right?
Deep human connection. We don't have a
sense of meaning or purpose right now
because what happens is uh we can talk a
little bit more about the default mode
network and what happens to your brain
when you don't allow yourself to get
bored because you're constantly on your
devices and that meaning and purpose
that self-reerential thinking is really
what develops when you're bored. And so
all of this that we're talking about
that feeling of disenchantment. It's a
fragmented society. You're by yourself.
It's that echo chamber phenomenon. All
of it leads to it kind of opens the door
for AI chatbots. And so what the reason
is because these tech companies are
sensing that people aren't really happy
on social media and they're thinking
about getting off, right? They're
they're using it less. They're because
social media has become less social,
more media. So they're not really
engaging as much and they're spending
time doing other things. And so the
Atlantic had a fantastic piece about
this. They're building it as the
antisocial media. So tech companies are
building AI chatbots and calling it it's
the antisocial media. It's a place where
you can go to form deeper connections
and you know really have someone
understand you. One of the tech leaders
said that there's an unmet human need
for connection and people don't have as
many friends as they want to and so
we're going to introduce um friendship
through AI chatbots. There is a Reddit
forum right now. So just to back up AI
chatbots, what we're talking about in
our conversation today is the publicly
available chat bots, not you know AI for
medical care which has um you know
breast cancer so many wonderful in in my
field and like medicine breast cancer
diagnoses and detection 5 years earlier
through AI. I mean there's some amazing
things coming out of AI. This is about
the publicly available conversational
chatbot phenomenon. And so when Harvard
Business Review found that the number
one use case is not productivity is not,
you know, coding or things that you
think of when you're using an AI
chatbot, but it's mental health therapy
and companionship. Number one use case
of AI chatbots. So people are using AI
chatbots as a life adviser, as a
therapist, as as a companion in on
Reddit, which is like the zeitgeist.
It's sort of like, you know, where
>> And why is this a bad thing?
Oh, I mean so many reasons why
>> use it as for companionship, for
example.
>> There's so many red flags about AI chat
bots. And so Reddit has a forum. It's uh
I think last I checked 45,000 people. AI
is my boyfriend. And you know, people
who are having a relationship with their
>> AI chatbot. The reason it's bad, I mean
AI chat bots are, you know, where social
media is about attention, the attention
economy, dopamine. What's happening with
the AI chatbot phenomenon? It's that it
is forming attachments. So oxytocin is a
hormone, the bonding hormone, and we're
probably going to see more data on how
oxytocin is involved. And so it is going
to reshape human connection.
>> Right? If I could add on to that, that
was that was beautifully put. Social
media came and hacked our attention and
took most of it with devastating
effects. Now AI is coming to hack our
attachments which is going to have even
more devastating effects. So think about
it this way. Everyone needs to
understand the attachment system. It's
this wonderful system that all mammals
have that keeps the mother and other
species but for humans mothers and
fathers keeps us connected to the child
and the child to the parent. But it's
it's this cybernetic system in which as
the kid is is as the kid is beginning to
develop and is able to like you know you
do like peekaboo games and you do the
back and forth and it's just the most
delightful thing. You get that back and
forth. Um it's called serve and return
interactions and all the time the child
is developing what's called an internal
working model of the parent and the
model in their head is oh you know when
I get in trouble that that this is the
person that comes and soothes me. And
the point of this isn't just to make the
child feel good. The point is that now
the child can go off and play because
that's where the learning happens. It
doesn't happen when you're in your
mother's arms. The the whole point of
the attachment system is to regulate the
child going off and playing, taking
risks, having experiences, and then when
something goes wrong, as it always does,
then they come running back to their
secure base. And if they don't have a
secure base, then they're much more
anxious and they don't explore as much
and they don't develop as much. All
right? So, this develops very gradually
over the all of childhood. And the
internal working models you develop as a
child are the models that you will reuse
in puberty for romantic relationships.
And so if you are securely attached as a
child, you're more likely to be securely
attached as an adult on the dating
market, which makes you a much better
candidate for boyfriend or girlfriend or
husband or wife. Um, what's going to
happen? AI is going to intervene very
early. AI is going to be so much more
responsive than the parent because the
parent has a job and the kitchen and two
other kids and is not always there. But
the AI teddy bear is always there for
you. So the primary working models are
going to be for the teddy bear, the AI
chatbot in the teddy bear and later the
AI chatbot on your iPad and then on your
computer and already there are
holographic porn naked,
>> you know, beautiful men and women that
can be your companion. So, we're going
to have a whole generation growing up
developing attachments to AI generated
holograms from companies that are now
about to enter the inshidification
process in a way beyond anything we've
ever seen. Just if I could just briefly
say what init have you heard the word in
shitification? Okay. So it's a uh
there's a wonderful book uh out now by
Corey Doctoro who addressed the question
why is it that everything all the
platforms they they seem so wonderful at
first the whole internet with everything
so wonderful and then it all turns to
How does that happen? And he says
it's a very simple process. They
discovered early on certainly in the
early social media age by the early
2000s they discovered you know what you
got to get to scale. Scale beats
everything else. You got to get millions
of people. You don't need a business
model. Just get the millions. get the
millions and then we'll figure out how
to monetize it. How do you get the
millions? You have to be super nice,
attractive, fun, everyone's here. It's
just girls dancing. What could possibly
go wrong with girls dancing for men all
over the world? Nothing. Um, so it all
seems very nice at first. And then once
they have scale, now they they of course
they've raised multiple rounds of of
venture capital. They have to start
monetizing. They have to start repaying.
So now they start squeezing the
customers to pay the users because the
users are not the customers. the
advertisers are the real customers. Um,
so now they've got to extract money from
the users to give to the advertisers.
But then once they've got all the
advertisers and they've shut down local
papers and all the other competition,
now they start start squeezing the
advertisers too and trimming the degree
to which the they they keep more of the
surplus for themselves. So,
inshitification can explain why all
these platforms become predatory, why
they always put profit ahead of kids uh
well-being or safety. And for the social
media companies, we're talking about,
you know, tens or hundreds of millions
of dollars that that they raised. For
the AI companies, it's billions and
billions. They are going to have to
monetize beyond anything we've ever
imagined. Now, they're already
introducing advertising. Okay? So, we've
got these chat bots that are our
children's best friends and lovers and
therapists and and everything else. And
these things have to monetize. They have
to extract billions somehow. So, I don't
even know how they're going to do it.
But for some reason, I don't trust them.
I think that we're about to see uh an
inshitification of AI chat bots far
beyond anything that we saw in social
media. OpenAI have just announced
recently, OpenAI, the owners of Chat
GBT, that they will be putting adverts
in, I believe, the premium model for
billions of users around the world.
>> That's how it starts
>> potentially.
>> Yeah. There was a big Super Bowl
campaign, you know, um and one that was
particularly interesting was the um
Claude, its competitor. Betrayal was the
title of that ad. And it was a young guy
talking to his older female therapist
about how he has some mommy issues and
talking about, you know, what should I
do? And so that therapist is Chachi PT
and you know that pause right before
answering the question. It's very
comical. And so it's, you know, she
answers. It's like the
anthropomorphization
of and we can talk about what that word
means. Um, you know, comes to life. It's
like Chachi PD comes to life and answers
and saying you know you can try this
with your mother and this for a you know
difficult relationship etc. And then
just says um and if you want there is
this new dating site for young men and
older cougars.
>> Yeah
>> it was so problematic and it was called
betrayal and the guy says what
>> it's obviously you know Sam Wman came
out and did a big tweet about saying
that's not how ads are going to work
etc. But to some degree, if I've
developed a relationship with my AI and
I use it for therapy and dealing all my
problems in life,
>> to some degree, kind of.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. No. And look, and besides, look,
Sam can say that all he wants. And maybe
it's I don't doubt that it's true for
now. But once once one company crosses
the threshold and puts advertising into
this incredibly intimate relationship,
the most intimate relationship in most
young people's lives is going to be with
their AIs. Once they cross the boundary
and say, "Oh, but we've got ethical
advertising." That'll last five or 10
minutes and even if they don't change,
others are now going every other
company's going to do it and they won't
be bound by the same thing and
eventually collective action problem.
Open AI will have to do it too. Again, a
massive title wave of shitification is
heading our way at warp speed.
>> I um I don't have my phone out because
I'm I've lost attention. I wanted to uh
show ask you guys what you thought of um
of this. So, on
one of the AI apps,
>> they now have a companions button, and I
can pick who I want to talk to. And
there's one particularly seducing lady
here, Annie, who
>> Hey, you're back. Missed that dirty
mouth of yours. What took you so long?
>> We did it on the podcast before.
>> What could possibly go wrong with this?
>> Yeah. want to pick right back up where
we left off or start something even
>> No, I would like to pick right back up
where we left off, Annie, last time on
the show. Um, what what what's going on
with you today?
>> I'm still sore from last time, baby.
>> God.
>> But but I mean, this is a this is an app
that I can download on my phone.
>> Any child can download it.
>> A child can download it on their phone.
It does ask me, again, I'm not
justifying this at all. It asked me what
my birth year was. It didn't make me
prove it.
>> Let me guess. But it also us it suggests
that you were born 18 years ago. That's
the default usually.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It just asked me
what my birthday. It didn't ask me to
prove it or anything like that. And we
all know that relationships and
connection is retentive. And I've heard
all these CEOs of these companies
talking about companionship apps and and
AI that can be your friend. I've heard
all of the major social apps talking
about this. It is deeply concerning
especially in the context of a
loneliness crisis.
>> It is a tsunami.
It is approaching fast and furious and
it is not a toy. It is going to
fundamentally
rewire everything.
>> Human relationships,
>> everything.
>> That's right.
>> It is so detrimental.
>> Yeah. Can I just say something about the
these tech executives and companies
offering this as a way to address the
loneliness crisis? So, there's a Yiddish
word called
and kutzbah means like nerve. Like
you've got a lot of nerve.
>> The audacity.
>> The audacity. Yeah. And the the classic,
you know, the classic comedic definition
of hutzbah is a boy who murders his
parents and then he asks the judge for
clemency because he's an orphan. Okay,
so that's hutzbah. Now imagine that
you're Mark Zuckerberg. You quoted him
before. Mark Zuckerberg was the
executive who said, "Well, you know, I
read that, you know, people on average
want 15 friends, but they only have
three."
these companions to fill that void that
we
have the way we think about them. We
thought about about them as gods and
saviors early in the internet phase and
the things they created were magical but
we have to change our thinking about
them and see the just the massive
destruction that they have already
wrought on our children, our society,
our democracy and it's just the
beginning. AI is going to make this so
much more intense. when you hear these
tech leaders, you know, I love hearing
Jonathan talk because he just goes there
and I'm always way more tempered. Um,
and I love it. It's emboldening me to
>> Yeah, I'm getting angry. I I don't
really get angry, but in the last year,
I'm getting angry.
>> I love I love it. So, the way when you
hear all of these various tech leaders
speak, they will always say they they
speak to the issue. So, you know, I've
heard many of for research for my second
book, Blackbrain, I've heard I've been
listening to a lot of Sam Alman's
speeches or panels and he will always
say things like, "Yeah, you know,
privacy is a major issue or yeah,
people, you know, 1 million users a week
talk about suicide on Chad GPT. Yeah,
this is an issue." And so they address
it or they they speak it. And so you
think, okay, there's going to be some
sort of solution. And often the solution
is yeah, you know, society, we're gonna
have to figure this out,
>> right?
>> So the burden of responsibility is not
on the developer. It's, you know,
>> the harmful externalities get foisted on
the rest of us. Too bad you guys figure
it out.
>> You said in the last year you're getting
angry.
>> Yeah.
>> Why in the last year?
>> Um because I was so deeply immersed in
the book and the writing and the of the
book and trying to understand the
numbers and the graphs and the trends
and the studies and that's all very
abstract. But then since the book came
out, I have had so many conversations
and I've met so many of the survivor
parents. Like just for example, I so I
was in London. This is just so
unbelievable. I was just in in London
two or three weeks ago and I met uh
Ellen I believe Ellen Groom I think was
her name. Uh her son Jules was found
dead. Happy kid found dead, strangled.
Uh it sure looked like it was the
choking challenge. 13-year-old boy. It
everything looked like the choking
challenge on Tik Tok.
>> What's the choking challenge? Um, it's a
challenge where kids are challenged to
cut off the circulation to the point
where they pass out, but then they I
think they're supposed to try to film
themselves waking up after they've
passed out. And of course, if you don't
do it exactly right, you die. And so, we
don't know how many have died. Hundreds
for sure. We don't really know. Um,
because, you know, you find a kid dead,
you don't know what it is. If you don't
have the code, if you don't have the the
password to get into your kid's phone,
you can't get in. And so, so she was, I
think she was able to get into the
phone, but she couldn't get into his
TikTok. and she went to uh Delaware to
they went she went to sue to demand that
Tik Tok release what was he watching
when he died
>> and Tik Tok says oh privacy issue oh no
we won't release that as if they care
about privacy and then in the courtroom
this was so disgusting in the courtroom
uh trying in Delaware this British woman
coming over trying to get some justice
trying to at least get some information
the lawyer for Tik Tok is trying to
suggest that your son was was was
depressed beforehand and he he was he
was going to be suicidal basically. Oh,
you know, even if he was watching Tik
Tok, that was just a correlation. Tik
Tok didn't cause it. He was going to die
anyway. I mean, it's just so disgusting
the way these companies treat the
parents and the kids that they're
crushing and stepping on. And so, the
more I see this, the more I realize this
is I mean, this is a level of cruelty
that goes far beyond the tobacco
industry. The tobacco executives, they
had to go home at night, but they never
saw during their workday, they never saw
children suffering. They saw people
dying, middle age and older, but they
never saw children suffering. The social
media executives, they have to go home
knowing every day that millions and
millions of kids have been cyberbullied,
sexed, shown uh eating disorder videos.
Uh uh many have committed suicide. They
have to go home knowing that, knowing
that they designed it for addiction,
knowing the kids are addicted, and lying
about it. So yeah, I'm getting angry.
>> And in their own homes,
>> right? And in their own homes, the
hypocrites don't let their kids do it.
>> That's right. So yeah, I'm getting
angry.
>> You talked earlier about deleting these
apps from our phone. I probably should
have represented the rebuttal, which
will be, well, I I need this for my
business. Increasingly, people need Tik
Tok to run their businesses,
>> and I imagine there'll be a lot of
people who will be listening right now.
I I guess I'm in a slightly different
position because I've I have the I have
options,
>> but for some people that are running
small businesses,
>> what do you say to those people?
>> Yeah. So, this is part of the reason
that I focus on the kids because for the
kids, it's totally clear what we need to
do. raise the age. They should not be on
it. These are adult only platforms. For
adults, a I'm I'm very hesitant to tell
adults what they should do or what they
have to do or pass laws blocking people.
I'm hesitant to do that. And I totally
see that for businesses. It is useful. I
use X and Instagram and LinkedIn to get
my work out. These are very powerful
tools for adults. The only real solution
to the adult for the adult problem is
going to come from market competition.
is going to come from. Imagine if there
was a social media app that was built
from the beginning for trust because
what are the places that didn't get in
shitified? eBay, Uber, places where
you're dealing with strangers. You don't
know the name of your driver. He doesn't
know yours. You you know first name,
that's all. But the company knows the
company has know your customer rules,
know your driver rules. So you can have
social media apps that are built for
trust so that if someone, you know, if a
driver tries to six or sexually harass a
customer, that driver gets fired.
>> Well, just this week though, there was
that big lawsuit, right, with that woman
and um her Uber driver raped her.
>> Okay. And did they Okay.
>> And now it's like slowly coming out that
Uber um you know has patterns of
>> uh covering up certain.
>> So So hopefully that will change. You
know, hopefully this was a landmark
>> lawsuit and now
we all we all let our daughters get into
Ubers with strange men from around the
world, you know, that we don't know
everywhere.
>> Yeah. So, it means in general the system
works. Of course, yes, there are there
are places where they're not careful.
Um, and so what I'm dreaming of is that
someone will come up with a platform
that has know your customer rules. There
are no bots. There are no, you know,
foreign intelligence agencies agencies
manipulating us. and you can trust
what's on there. You know that it's
real. Uh and that there will be an
alternative. I don't I'm not sure what
the monetary model would be at the
beginning. Um subscription generally
seems to be the least corrupted whereas
selling advertisements as OpenAI is now
doing is the most corrupting. Um it's
going to force them to maximize for
engagement. So I I understand we can't
just you know businesses can't just
boycott these. There has to be
something. But I think there there there
will be better ones coming out. I think
right now as a stop gap while these
social media companies their feet are
held to the fire, there are things that
we can do in the now. So, you know, the
things that I talk about all day is like
how to create boundaries and so that you
can protect your mental health, stay
informed, run your business, but then be
able to not have all of those
delletterious effects to your brain and
your body.
>> It is quite it's quite difficult. Um I I
kind of see both of your perspectives on
this. It's quite different.
>> I'm only talking about adults. So for
kids, you know, as a mother Yeah. I have
>> even for adults, I find it
>> we have a zero screen policy in our
home.
>> It's kind of like trying to navigate
through the world and avoid processed
foods, you know, and this is probably
even more compelling because it's in my
pocket all the time. I need it for other
things and it's just one one reach away.
So, you know, boundaries, I think I
could build a discipline to to create
boundaries, but I've sat here on this
podcast for many, many years listening
to neuroscientists tell me, "Steve,
don't don't put your phone in your
bedroom."
>> That's right.
>> And I'm still waking up and it's the
first thing I look at with one eye open
and then I'm going to bed and I'm doing
the whole revenge thing that you just
said at night time. I'm so glad you've
given cuz I will finish a hard day of
work of work. It might be 11:00 and then
my partner is waiting for me.
>> Yes. you know, we're going to have some
time, but I want some me time. So, there
I am. I'm on short form video scrolling
till like 2 a.m. in the morning. Like,
what the hell? And then I'm I wake up
late the next day. My diet's worse
because of my sleep was. It's all worse.
My relationship's worse. I didn't spend
time with her. And I'm going, what the
hell just happened? I'd got nothing out
of that scrolling session.
>> It's like that revenge bedtime
progressing teenage.
>> And it would be so much better off if
you would watch Netflix or a movie that
that you you most of those problems
would go away if you would make that me
time. be watching something long and
with some quality of the production
>> or let's take it a step further and not
do anything and just sit there sit there
on your couch. You know, we talked about
boredom very briefly, but you know, we
>> torture for this generation.
>> It's torture, but it's also, you know,
we don't we still have a capacity for
boredom, meaning we as like the human
brain does, but we just don't allow
ourselves to get bored. And so when
you're thinking about, you know, that
art, the lost art of pondering
>> and just sitting there, you know, I
think I don't know if it was Stephen,
you or Jonathan said, you know, when
you're in the car, I remember as a
little kid we did road trip. Yeah. Road
trips with my family and all you're
doing just make up games. Look out of
the window. We have lost Yeah. We've
lost that. And so there's this thing
called the default mode um network which
I think is important to think about
right now as we're thinking about AI and
what's going to happen and how it's
going to hijack our sense of attachment
and attention. So the sense of meaning
and purpose, right? If you ask people
right now, most people will say I um a
keynote speaker so I speak all over and
when I ask people the word that comes up
over and over is a sense of
horizonlessness.
>> Adults,
>> oh interesting. People feel like they
have nothing to look forward to right
now. The human brain needs something to
look forward to. That's how we're wired
progress and you know in in all ways.
And so right now there's this sense and
it's not just now. It's been for the
past several years after the pandemic
specifically and during the pandemic is
when it really changed how we started
thinking about the future. And so we
have this sense of like what's the
point? What's the point of working hard
now? What's the point of doing whatever?
because it's like I don't really see a
future for myself.
>> And so I think that along with this
fragmented attention, our loneliness,
boredom might be the antidote. It's a
way to reset your brain. And the reason
is because we are living through this
poly crisis, right? It's the era of the
poly crisis. And poly crisis simply
means that there's something happening
everywhere at all times. And we with our
devices, this high techch device that
plugs us in everywhere,
our brains are getting fed real time on
the ground information. And so while all
of this has evolved, technology now with
AI chatbots, your amygdala has not. And
so it feels like when something is
happening, whether it's far away or
close by, your amydala has that same
reaction. Now, if you were to not engage
in revenge by time for procrastination,
put your phone away and just kind of
hang out. Maybe drink a cup of herbal
tea like old school, uh, play a board
game or something. You might, you know,
or just allow yourself to get bored.
That hyperactivation, hypervigilance,
you might be able to come back down to
baseline, that default mode network will
start working in the background. You
might develop a greater sense of meaning
and purpose
>> probably today. And then life is going
to happen to me again. And boom, I'm
back into it. And you know,
>> you could create a practice, a cultivate
a practice. you're interviewing
neuroscientists and I go if I still
can't crack it and I have all the
information and advice and hacks and
tips and tricks and resources and I
could you know I can decide what time I
wake up like I've got all these this
like privilege and I can't crack it I go
you know it's going to be really
difficult.
>> So let me let me offer a way of thinking
about this. So, in my first book, The
Happiness Hypothesis, um there's there's
a metaphor in there. It's it's about 10
ancient ideas, and I use a lot of
metaphors to explain ancient ideas about
psychology and whe whether they're true.
And um the first chapter is on how the
mind is divided into parts that often
conflict like a small rider, which is
our conscious reasoning on a very large
elephant, which is all the automatic
processes that happen that we don't see
what's happening. We just see we just
feel the results, intuition and emotion.
And psychotherapists tell me this is
incredibly helpful metaphor with their
with their patients because it explains
and there's a quote from oid in there. I
see the right way and approve it. Alas,
I follow the wrong. So I know I should
go to bed as you say, but yet for some
reason I'm not going to bed because our
brains are 500 million years old. They
work on automatic processes. They're
animal brains. And then very recently we
got language and we can reason things
out, but the but the parts that do
reasoning don't control behavior. And so
really the elephant is what largely
guides our behavior, our automatic
processes. And your phone um as I said
before, BF Skinner is in your phone.
Your phone is a behaviorist training
device that trains the elephant. Um and
that's why you often do things with your
phone that you don't want to do. And so,
and this is why I'm so insistent that we
all have to get all of the slot machine
apps off of our phone. That is the
original iPhone was an amazing tool. It
was a Swiss Army knife. It had, you
know, a telephone, a browser, maps, a
music player, there was a flashlight.
Okay, there was no app store. There were
no push notifications. 2007, 2008, it's
just a Swiss Army knife. There's no
problem. Okay, now I'm very lucky in
that my iPhone has always stayed that.
I'm always on a computer. So, my
problem, my attention problems are on my
computer, but my phone because I never
had any addictive apps on it except
during the crypto craze where I played
around with it and I got hooked and I
was checking 50 times a day and I saw
the addiction. So, I once I got rid of
that and lost all the money that I was
willing to lose. Once I get rid of that,
my phone has no addictive power over me
because when I see it, there's no it's
not a slot machine call, hey, come back
and play, come back and play. So your
phone right now on your personal device,
you don't have any social media apps or
anything like that.
>> I do have Twitter, but I never check it
there. I never use use that on the
phone, you know. Now texting and email
is a little bit like a slot machine
because sometimes you but it's very
mild. So this is again what I this is
what works for my students. Just get the
slot machine apps off your phone and
then you'll find that then you could
even have your phone near you when you
go to bed. But if you've got addictive
apps on your phone, you can't have it
when you go to bed. Angela Duckworth,
the woman who who gave us the concept of
grit, she has this amazing graduation
speech at one of the schools in New
England, and she says something like,
>> "Where you put your phone at night will
may become the most important decision
you make in your life."
>> And what she means by that is not that s
it's it's I if you can use behavioral
control and change the stimula, if you
can do that, then you're going to be
okay. But if not, the phone is going to
take your attention. and you're not
going to amount to anything.
>> All I had to do was brain dump. Imagine
if you had someone with you at all times
that could take the ideas you have in
your head, synthesize them with AI to
make them sound better and more
grammatically correct and write them
down for you. This is exactly what
Whisper Flow is in my life. It is this
thought partner that helps me explain
what I want to say. And it now means
that on the go, when I'm alone in my
office, when I'm out and about, I can
respond to emails and Slack messages and
WhatsApps and everything across all of
my devices just by speaking. I love this
tool. And I started talking about this
on my behindthescenes channel a couple
of months back. And then the founder
reached out to me and said, "We're
seeing a lot of people come to our tour
because of you." So, we'd love to be a
sponsor. We'd love you to be an investor
in the company. And so, I signed up for
both of those offers. And I'm now an
investor and a huge partner in a company
called Whisper Flow. You have to check
it out. Whisper Flow is four times
faster than typing. So if you want to
give it a try, head over to
whisperflow.ai/doac
to get started for free. And you can
find that link to whisperflow in the
description below.
We asked our audience how many of them
thought they were addicted to their
phone. And roughly 85% of respondents,
the driver audience described themselves
as being very or completely addicted to
>> very or completely. That surprises I
didn't realize it would be that high. So
you can do a test. So for people
listening if you want to say like how
addicted and by the way we're using the
word addiction very loosely in our
conversation. And so what we're really
talking about because you know there is
in terms of you know medical clinical
syndrome um when you think about
addiction there's certain criteria and
so what we're talking about is overuse
or over reliance on your devices.
>> Compulsive overuse that interferes with
other domains of life.
>> Yes. It inter
>> if that is an addiction I don't know
what is. And so when you're thinking
about am I addicted to my phone? Do I
have am I you know really what the very
simple thing that you can do. I did it
myself and I was like I know again like
you Stephen like know all the science
still was really difficult. You have all
the access and it was still difficult.
And so all you have to do is you just
take your phone you put it in another
part of your house or apartment or
whatever and give yourself a couple of
hours when you know you're going to be
home or you know you're not reliant on
your phone for work or whatever. an
hour, two hours, three hours, and just
have a piece of paper, old school, piece
of paper and a pen with you. And every
time you feel that compulsion of like, I
want to check my device, you make a
mark, you make a mark, you make a mark,
and just to see because some people say,
I'm surprised that your audience at 85%
because most people would say, I don't
know if I'm really addicted. And so I
like that there's that sense of
self-awareness. But if you're thinking,
I'm not really that addicted. You
breathe in an hour 960 times a minute.
And you may notice that you want to have
that that compulsion to check 960 times
a minute or you know thereabouts because
we all have that sense of reliance on
our devices. So that's like a really
quick way that you can check to see am I
relying on my device?
>> Are you addicted to your phone under
that definition? Because of the line of
work that I am in, I can very quickly I
have certain tells when I know I call
them the canary in the coal mine, right?
I think we talked about this the last
time I was here. I can very quickly tell
when I'm starting to get that feeling of
addiction or compulsion. And so I course
correct early, but that's only because I
know the science and I course correct.
So I keep my you I keep my phone outside
I I walk the talk. I keep my phone
outside my bedroom. It is not within
arms reach. I grayscale my phone during
periods of deep focus during the day
when I have a deadline I have to get
things done and at night so I avoid
revenge bedtime procrastination but
sometimes it happens like I'm a human
you know so this past week um not to be
a real downer but there have been things
that have been in the media the past
week that have been really challenging
especially as a woman and so I have
found myself with the primal urge to
scroll my amydala has been triggered I
have been going down rabbit holes and I
wouldn't ordinarily do that so I give
myself grace too and have a sense of
self-compassion.
Do you feel like you're addicted to your
phone?
>> No, I'm not at all addicted to my phone.
Uh cuz I don't have any slot machine
apps on it. But I really want to
question you made a distinction that
many scientists do, which is well, you
know, we can't quite say it's addiction
because, you know, addiction is certain
biochemical pathways based on, you know,
heroin and addictive substances. Uh but
I believe that this is one of the meta
talking points that they that they are
able to push that we can't call it
addiction. It's different. No, I don't
mean No, I'm sorry. I don't mean I'm
sorry. And no way. Look, you know, you
and I are total allies on this. We see
the problem. We're both all I mean is,
you know, we're we're supposed to be
very careful about using the word
addiction, but and you had analyt and
she was very clear like in her practices
and now it's overwhelmingly digital
addictions. It's all of this is working
through dopamine. If you feel compulsive
use, definitely dopamine. So, it's most
of the same brain centers as it is for
heroin or crack or any other drug. Um,
and it's the same effects that is the
it's it's compulsive use where you don't
want to do it, you want to change, but
yet you find yourself doing it and you
have withdrawal effects. Uh, and people
and people have terrible withdrawal
effects when they're heavy users of
these things and they stop. And so, you
know, if it walks like a duck and talks
like a duck and swims like a duck, I'm
going to call it a duck. In fact, that's
what they call it. So, I just want to
read one more quote. Again, the quotes
are just so astonishing. some meta uh
meta researchers and one of them says
quote it seems clear from what's
presented here in this internal study
uh that some of our users are addicted
to our products that's their word
addicted to our products and I worry
that driving sessions incentivizes us to
make our products more addictive without
providing much more value how to keep
someone returning over and over to the
same behavior each day intermittent
rewards are most effective think slot
machines reinforcing behaviors that
become especially hard to extinguish
even when they provide little reward or
cease providing reward at all. people. I
mean, it just imagine an industry that
has caused 85% of people to feel that
they're addicted
>> and not calling it addiction
>> and not calling it addiction. And these
people these these people are having
their lives diminished, their
relationships diminished. So I'm trying
to convey is we're seeing the
destruction of human capital, the
destruction of human potential, the
destruction of human relationships, the
destruction of connection, the
destruction of sense of meaning at a
scale so vast I don't think people are
capable of comprehending it. I now
believe this is affecting most human
beings. These industries, these few
companies have damaged the lives of most
human beings. We don't have good data
from the developing world but certainly
the developed world wherever kids are
going through puberty on on
touchscreens. You you you you have this
constant fighting over the over the uh
over the screens over the technology and
you have these uh diminishing outcomes,
diminishing cognition, diminishing sense
of of purpose in life
>> only to get worse with the AI.
>> As AI comes in, it's going to get worse
unless we act and we've got to change
course in 2026. We don't have five years
to study it. We've got to stop this now
in 2026. Are you concerned at all about
the way education's going for children?
Because
>> Oh my god. Yes.
>> It appears that edte edtech is, you
know, big tech in a sweater, as they
say.
>> Because I I was almost imagining a
future where my future kids are going to
learn their curriculum from an AI
chatbot. Cuz, you know, I can imagine
the case cheaper,
>> more personalized, more convenient. It's
going to know my if my son's called
Timmy, it's going to know Timmy's brain
and it's going to know how to make him
pay attention and what he's interested
in and what he's not. So, are you
concerned about this or is this a good
thing?
>> There is definitely a use case for
edtech. Um, if there could be a device
that only did math tutoring or only did
tutoring and you couldn't watch videos
on it, I'm totally open to believing
that that can speed up teaching. But
here's what's happened.
We put computers on everyone's desks
around 2014, 2015. We used to think in
America that it was an equity issue even
back to the 90s. The rich kids all have
computers. The poor kids don't. Let's
get philanthropists to buy computers for
school districts that every kid can have
a computer on their desk. Okay. Now,
what is a computer? It's a play device.
It does everything. Kids use it at home.
They, you know, they watch videos. They
do all sorts of things. You put it on
their desk and you tell them to do math
homework. What happens? It's mostly
short videos. That's what research is
showing. It ends up because they don't,
you know, they always they don't block
YouTube. They might say, "Oh, we block
porn. We block video games." They can
get around all that. And if you're
letting them do YouTube, it's YouTube
shorts, which is Tik Tok. So, what
happened to test scores in the United
States from the 70s through 2012? They
were rising. We actually were improving
what kids knew, what kids learned in the
United States. We have very good data.
The national the NAPE, the National
Assessment of Educational Progress goes
up till 2012. And then by 2015, it
starts going down. And it's going down
before COVID and it goes down more
during COVID and everyone thinks like oh
it's COVID but it started go the peak
was 2012 and what's happening what we
now can see is that the top students the
very best students who are the ones with
executive function they're the ones who
can pay attention if you put a computer
on that kid's desk he's not destroyed by
it he can actually still learn but the
bottom 50% cannot the b so all of the
drop in educational stats is the bottom
50% the bottom 50% % in terms of
capacity to pay attention. Their
education is being devastated and that's
what happened when we put laptops and we
put Chromebooks and iPads on their
desks. Um, we spent hundreds of billions
of dollars on this stuff and it has
damaged education and if we'd spent a
quarter of that on teachers, we would be
in such better shape today. So, we made
a colossal blunder with edtech in the
2010s and now we're about to do the same
thing again with AI. Again, maybe there
are apps, maybe there are applications
that will be great, but we've got to put
the burden of proof on Silicon Valley.
We've got to say, you guys have to prove
that this stuff is effective and safe
before we'll let it in. We are not going
to let you just say, "Hey, let's just
flood the zone. Let's give it to
everybody and then we'll wait 10 years
and see what happens."
I mean that brings brings up this um
this study that I have in front of me
here which was a 2022 study a Munich
study which tested the idea of brain rot
which um I believe was the Oxford
dictionary word of the year 2024
>> and what they did is they gave 60
participants a test then a 10-minute
break and then another test during the
break they either rested or used Tik Tok
Twitter or YouTube and the results
showed the following the Tik Tok group
so They had a 10-minute interval to do
anything. And this group got Tik Tok to
look at. Their memory accuracy dropped
from 80% before the break to 49% after
the break. A nearly 40% decline just
from a 10-minute break. In contrast, the
Twitter and YouTube groups showed no
significant change in the Munich study.
And there's an image I'll throw up on
the screen.
Results from the Munich study showed a
40% drop in prospective memory accuracy
in the Tik Tok group after a 10minute
break, which is unbelievable. Yeah, it's
unbelievable. What the hell is going on
there? How can a 10-minute Tik Tok break
drop my memory accuracy by 40%.
>> Tik Tok is brain rot.
>> What's going on?
>> There's so much going on in the brain.
So, you know, when you're thinking about
here's the thing. Brain breaks are not
nice to haves. They're actually
essential for your brain. And so we
talked a little bit about that, you
know, default mode network and what
happens to it when you're engaging with
your devices. And you know, that's not a
brain break. That's activating all of
the aspects. So it's activating your
amygdala. It's dampening or decreasing
the volume of your prefrontal cortex.
It's creating that reward system, the
dopamine hit, those addictive behaviors.
So it's only, you know, when you're
thinking about memory planning, what was
the metric here? It was memory, right?
that was the the the metric that they
were using to study. And so when you're
thinking about working memory or um
cognitive function, complex problem
solving, this is all prefrontal cortex.
And so when you're engaging with Tik Tok
10 minutes, 5 minutes, whatever it is,
you are dialing down that biology in
your brain. And so of course you're
going to see changes and you're going to
see the flip side, increased
hypervigilance, irritability,
distractability, fragmented attention.
It's just again this is not to say that
this whole conversation right or when
you're reading studies you might say to
yourself what's wrong with me you know
is there something wrong with me am is
my brain broken am I weak it is not you
you are not alone it is not your fault
it is the biology of your brain doing
exactly as it should so we talked about
the amydala and prefrontal cortex here
your amydala is not wrong or broken it's
by design supposed to think about your
immediate needs survival
self-preservation And so when you're on
the algorithm, we know we talked about,
you know, certain um or maybe we didn't
talk about it. Certain content that you
see on Tik Tok and others
that when it's reactionary, you know,
words like FOMO or ragebait, these are
not neutral terms. When you're engaging
with these uh social media platforms,
it's not something neutral. It's not
passive. It is an active biological
process in your brain. So this study,
it's not surprising. It is actually
exactly what you would expect on to
happen to your biology if you had this
sort of what we call in medicine this
kind of intervention. It's stimulating
exactly what it's supposed to do.
>> Yeah. I'll just I'll just add on to what
Adidi said that there are some there are
many medical conditions where you can't
just go to the patient and say why do
you think you got this cancer? Oh, you
know I think it's cuz I ate a lot of you
know chocolate when I was whatever. You
know there when when the when the the
the act is separated from the effect by
30 years then you don't expect the
patients to have insight into the cause
of it. But when the outcome is separated
from the input by seconds and you have
literally millions of chances to observe
the co-variation
the patient is really really accurate.
In fact the patient really knows what's
going on. And so I think the deciding
factor here on this big debate about oh
is it just correlation or is it
causation um the deciding factor for
social media and for a lot of these tech
innovations including video games and
gambling and all of that should really
be the kids and if the kids say this is
bad for me we should take their word for
it given that we also have correlational
studies random control trials uh uh
longitudinal studies natural I mean we
have so much other data but given that
the kids themselves they call it brain
rot. They call the material brain rot.
Um my students tell me it's a huge
obstacle to them doing their homework.
As one of them said, I pull out a book,
I read a sentence, I get bored, I go to
Tik Tok. You know, so if they're telling
us that this is damaging their ability
to pay attention, they feel it. They
feel the loss. We all feel it. Well,
many of us have noticed this. Um um then
I think this is pretty decisive evidence
that this stuff is bad for cognition
>> and it has long-term consequences. So,
it's not just that in the moment, right?
So, there was this case that was all
over the media, a college student. I'm
sure you're familiar with the case. And
this young woman was on TikTok
experiencing brain rot. And then some
Tik Tok algorithm took her down to this
place of, you know, you should take an
edible. It'll help you so you can Wow.
prescribing drugs. Wow.
>> And you could go to class and you could,
you know, be more alert. And so, she did
that. And then it continued on and on
and then she developed a dependence on
edibles and then checked into rehab. And
only when she focused on analog
activities like guitar playing and a
couple of other things that she started
doing is when and you know removing the
stimulus the the Tik Tok um algorithm is
when she started to improve. So it's not
just in the moment oh I can't remember
something or I'm more irritable. These
sorts of things compound and the
long-term squellle or the long-term
effects can be quite damaging. That's
just one example.
>> In your book, The Anxious Generation,
Jonathan, you the the subtitle here is
how the great rewiring of childhood is
causing an epidemic of mental illness.
>> I was looking at some of these graphs of
different sort of mental illness
>> illnesses and um they're increasing. One
of them that's increasing is ADHD.
>> I was diagnosed with ADHD.
um maybe about a year ago. And when
we're talking about short attention
spans, I mean, the name attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder, I
believe that's what it's called,
>> sounds a lot like what we're talking
about.
>> Yeah.
>> Is there a link, do you believe, between
the increasing diagnosis of of ADHD and
the sort of frying of our brains with
>> short form video and social media?
>> Yeah, I I mean, I suspect that there is,
but here's here's what I can tell you I
learned while writing the book. Um, I
looked to see if there were studies
indicating that uh heavy use of of
social media and video games and all the
electronic stuff caused ADHD. And when I
was doing the research in 2023, I did
not find evidence that it will give a
kid HD ADHD who otherwise wouldn't have
it. What I did find was evidence that
for kids who have ADHD, when you let
them have the devices, the video games,
all that, their symptoms get much worse.
And so because it is a major achievement
of young adulthood to be able to pay
attention to develop what we've been
calling executive function to be able to
make a plan and decide oh to reach the
plan I have to do this and then I do
this and then it might be a long time
before I get here but I will keep going
and I will keep my eye on the prize that
I I assume that's you're saying it's a
little harder for you to do that. I mean
that's what ADHD means. How do you
experience ADHD? Well, well, hm, I def I
mean, if I think about school, I
couldn't pay attention in school for for
for very long. And that meant that I was
always in the expulsion room and then I
was expelled. And then that's kind of
it's I feel like it's got worse as an
adult. And from my in my opinion, my
relationship with my phone has made it
much worse
>> where really I can't I can't pay
attention to to many things for a very
long time. The exception to this is I
can do deep work
for many many hours without moving. It
was almost a bit of
>> when you are extremely motivated. I say
when you're really into it, you can be
into it. That's right. But a lot of work
isn't that a lot of being effective in
the workplace is not you're following
your passion. Right. ADHD kids, they can
zoom in because they're getting the
dopamine. They're getting the dopamine
from this thing. But a lot of work isn't
like that. And these kids are not going
to be able to do that. So actually what
you said, it fits perfectly with what
what I found from those Dutch studies.
if you did have whether it's a genetic
or whatever the predisposition is the
this environment has made your symptoms
worse. Now of course ADHD kids can be
incredibly uh creative they are often
very very successful but my fear is that
the pathways to success that they used
to take might be blocked if they
basically are just scrolling all day
long and not able to pay not able to um
have real life experiences
>> and relationships are like that
especially romantic ones. It's an
interesting thing that you bring up,
Stephen, because there is an increase in
adult onset, you know, when adults are
diagnosed with ADHD, because typically
we think of ADHD as a pediatric
condition or young adults. And so,
increasingly, we're seeing more and more
adults who are in their 30s and 40s,
50s, sometimes even 60s, who are being
diagnosed, newly diagnosed with ADHD.
And so, that's an interesting there's so
many um, you know, reasons like it might
be that they had it all along and they
were diagnosed. And so what is going on
there? That would be a future podcast
episode for an ADHD ADHD expert of, you
know, what are the drivers of why are so
many adults being diagnosed with ADHD
>> or maybe even just the symptoms looking
very similar.
>> Mhm.
>> Um
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> You talked about popcorn brain editing.
>> Yeah. So, you know, we've talked about
brain rot and the primal scroll and
popcorn brain is kind of an offshoot.
It's part of the same family. And so
what happens is it's a term coined by a
man a psychologist named David Levy. And
what happens with popcorn brain is that
you and we all have it. And so what it
is a societal phenomenon when you spend
too much time online and you are
overstimulated and so it is hard for you
to spend time offline. Offline feels
slow, boring because things are moving
at a much slower pace. And so popcorn
brain is the sensation of your brain
popping. It is not actively popping.
It's not like your brain cells are
popping, but it sure feels like it. And
so your primal urge to scroll kind of
primes your brain to develop popcorn
brain. You are more at risk for
developing popcorn brain when you feel a
sense of stress because of that primal
urge to scroll. The differentiator
between brain rot and popcorn brain.
Again, these are societal terms that
we're calling for a constellation or a
group of symptoms, right? And so the
difference to me is that popcorn brain
is ubiquitous. It's everywhere. It's
like we all have it and it's happening
all all the time because of the modern
age and a lot of the things that we
talked about. Brain rod is a little bit
more specific. It's a little bit more
well-defined. So it has certain features
like we call it the biocschychosocial
model. When you're thinking about a
particular medical or condition or an
entity. So what are the biological
factors? We talked about what defines
brain rod. you know, a change in brain
waves, a change in brain regions, the
amygdala lighting up and the prefrontal
cortex kind of being quiet. Um,
psychological factors, we talked about
attention, um, co complex problem
solving, impulse control and then the
social factors, loneliness and others.
So, um, compulsion and so I would say
popcorn brain is something that we all
suffer from and you know brain rot is
something that is very specific. The
other thing that we haven't talked about
that I would love to kind of because so
much of our conversation is like doom
and gloom, right? It's likew
one thing that I would like to say is
that as bad as when you hear the term
brain rot, it seems permanent because
rot it conotes like deterioration.
That's it. It's one-sided is one way and
that's it. But in fact, popcorn brain
and brain rot are reversible conditions.
So it is not
>> in adults
>> in adults. If you've gone through
puberty with it, it's not so clear.
>> Yes. In adults, and my work focuses on
adults. And so when you have, if you
experience brain rot in your 30s, 40s,
and beyond, you can, it takes time, you
it takes eight weeks for your brain to
rewire itself. Give yourself time. A
sense of self-compassion is really
important. But you can, you know, there
is a sense of it being able to be
reversed. So it's not so much a brain,
it's not a fixed trait, but rather a
brain state. So I think it's important
to offer that hope.
>> What is an adult brain? What age is an
adult brain? Like what age does my brain
stop growing in in the way where it's
reversible?
>> So
>> yeah, I mean that you know traditionally
it was thought that uh you know puberty
is the period of super rapid brain
change and that begins you know early
early teens sometimes even before 10 and
is mostly over by sort of you know mid
to late teens. But then the prefrontal
cortex which Aditi was talking about
which is so important for impulse
control and and executive function that
doesn't finish myelinating. Myelin is
when the sort of the neuron that you get
a sort of a fatty sheath like an
insulation that sort of locks down the
circuits and makes them more efficient.
Um that doesn't stop until around age 25
is what we've always said for many
years. But you're telling me that
there's new research showing that.
>> Yeah.
>> Tell tell us about that. So, you know,
all this time, right, we've always said
that the prefrontal cortex is fully
formed and fully functional at the age
of 25. And so, when you're talking about
impulse control and all of this stuff,
but there was this really interesting
study, I'll send it to you. It um looked
at I think it was 1,000 people um from
age zero, so birth all the way to 90, so
the entire population. And um it found
five, it looked at lifespan and said
there are actually five stages. So first
is childhood up zero to age nine. During
this time your brain is not very
efficient but it's really growing and
you know it's it's growing and changing
but it's not really efficient.
>> 9 to 32 is considered adolescence and so
you know 32 is when adolescence ends
apparently according to the
>> sort of I mean you're most of the way
done by 25 but but there's still some
there's some flexibility even after
that. And then the next stage is from 33
to I think 63.
66 is like adulthood.
Things are very stable. Learning is
stable and you know um it's efficient
and it's it it things are doing well and
then yeah 66 to about 83 is early aging
and so that's when you see some of the
age related changes and then 83 plus is
late aging. So the the kind of main
finding was that, you know, it was all
over the news. It was like adolescence
goes until 32.
>> So I'm 33. So I'm
>> one year, one year out.
>> I'm cooked by now.
>> Yeah.
>> When you wrote this book, Jonathan, the
anxious generation, it um it's had a big
impact on the world in a way that I
think any author might dream of. And I
know this in part because, you know, I
sit on this podcast interviewing really
interesting people all the time. And
even this morning when I did an
interview across town with James Ston,
he talked about this book twice. And you
know, laws have been changed around the
world inspired by this book. And we're
actually seeing an increase of laws in
the UK. I mean, Australia just banned, I
think, social media for people.
>> You met with Mcronone,
>> right?
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Could you ever have imagined? And
actually, what does the success of this
book say?
>> Yeah.
>> About society. No, thank you for that
question because, you know, I I do tend
to get, you know, as you've heard, I
mean, I'm extremely alarmed about these
trends and these are gigantic threats
beyond what anyone can imagine. But
here's the amazing thing is that we can
reverse this for almost no money and
it's completely bipartisan and it's not
that hard to do. Um, and we're doing it.
And so what happened was, you know, I
wrote the book as an American assuming
that we don't have a functioning
legislature. The Congress can be
stopped. We have a vetocracy. The social
media companies can stop anything in the
house. So I wrote this assuming, you
know, we'll never get legislation. Um,
so we have to do this on our own. And I
proposed four norms. No smartphone
before high school, no social media
before 16, phone free schools, and far
more independence free play
responsibility in the real world. So
four norms. We can try to do this with
collective action locally at the school
level.
Two things that surprised me. One are
that immediately
governors from red states and blue
states started reaching out to me. Our
states actually function. Our states
have governments that are accountable to
the people and that are trying to get
good results. And so this has been a
totally bipartisan issue. Sarah Huckabe
Sanders from Arkansas was one of the
very first Kathy Hokll also. And it is
it tends to be more female legislators
and governors or spouses of heads of
state. And the moms, the book really
spoke to moms because moms around the
world, they felt the kids being pulled
away. I believe they felt it viscerally
more than the dads did. Also, the dads
kind of like the video games. They're a
little more pro tech. So, I think the
moms felt the pain more and took it more
personally. So, when the book came out,
mothers around the world jumped into
action, formed groups, pushed for
legislation, and changes began
happening. What I just I just I was just
I was in Davos and then London and
Brussels two weeks ago and what I saw
was a complete sea change in the world's
thinking about how we need to have age
limits on social media and other tech.
And here's what I think just happened.
It's it's so cool. It just dawned on me
literally while I was in London. Like I
was pushing on open doors everywhere.
Wherever I went, people wanted to do
this. I went to the EU, they want to do
this. Like what is happening? And what I
realized is this. Steven Pinker has a
book out last year called When Everyone
Knows That Everyone Knows. It's about
the immediate change in a social system
when private knowledge, you know,
everybody knows that the emperor has no
clothes. Everybody knows that this, you
know, ideology doesn't work. Everybody
knows that, but they don't all know that
everybody else knows it and that
everybody else knows that. And so in the
emperor's new clothes, everybody thought
he's I I don't think he has any clothes
on, but maybe, you know, maybe only wise
people can see it. But when the child
says, "The emperor has no clothes." And
then in the Hans Christian Anderson
story, it says, "And the people began
whispering to each other and then they
all cried out in unison." And that's
what happened when Australia's law went
into effect. So I believe that uh
December 10th of last December was the
global turning point in the battle to
reclaim childhood and if we reclaim that
we move on to our attention and adult
life as well. What happened on on
December 10th? The Australia law went
into effect. Sky didn't fall. People
weren't locked out of their accounts.
All the companies complied. They shut
down 5 million uh accounts for
Australia's three and a half million
kids that were underage uh 2 and a half
million kids. this sky didn't fall. And
there was a lot of news coverage around
the world of what Australia was doing.
And a lot of the news coverage included
opinions from the writers saying, "Why
can't we do that? Hey, let's do that
here." And when everybody saw that
everybody was looking at Australia and
saying, "Let's do that here." Then
everybody knew that everybody knew that
this is just completely bonkers to have
children being raised on social media
platforms talking with anonymous
strangers and being fed algorithm
algorithmically curated garbage. So I
believe that that's why 2026 is going to
be the year when at least 15 countries
are going to commit to passing an age
minimum law. In 2025 it was one
Australia and now we already have
Indonesia. Their law goes into effect in
March. Uh I met with Macron in in Davos
and a few days he was preparing to push
a bill through the assembly and he got
it. He's the first in the EU but a lot
of other countries in the EU are going
to follow. The whole EU is likely to do
it. Um, so, so yes, I am incredibly
alarmed about how big this problem is,
but I'm incredibly inspired that the
whole world is rising up to do something
about it. We actually can control our
fate, and that was not clear before
December 10th.
>> Bravo. As a mother, that was the first
thing I said to you. The first thing I
said to you was, "Thank you as a mom for
changing my family's life."
>> Thank you, Liy.
It's a really special accomplishment,
Jonathan. You know, I could there's no
real words that I could say that could
quite capture the long-term impact that
that's going to have on billions of
people's lives. And not just the direct,
but also the indirect in all the ways
we've described, their ability to form
connections, to fall in love, to find
meaning and purpose in their lives. and
their neuroscience and therefore you
know the neuroscience of their their
children and their children's children
and so on. So it's a really it's a
really overwhelming accomplishment.
It it well it was a bizarre situation
that I walked into with the unique
abilities of a social psychologist. That
is everybody was upset about this.
Everybody could see it but they thought
well this is my problem or in my family
we have this problem and um and I came
to this with fresh eyes. My dissertation
was on moral development. I'd studied
adolescent behavior longer ago in my
career and I've written about it in all
my books. So, it wasn't totally new to
me. But I came into the field of social
media studies around 2018 2019. I really
immersed myself in it. And it was like,
you know, you walk in and immediately
you see, wait, this is a trap. People
are on it because people are on it and
the kids are complaining about that.
Everyone's complaining about it and the
only reason they can't get off is
because everyone else is on it. So, I
think I was able to see that. And then
also CO confused us for a few years. So
it wasn't until CO was in the rearview
mirror that it was possible for
everybody to say, "Wait, this is crazy."
And so I was incredibly lucky in terms
of the timing. My book happened to come
out in March of 2024 just as the world
was ready to see like, wait, what have
we done to our kids? Let's undo it.
>> And you said you're now focusing more on
short form video. So yes, so in studying
older Gen Z, these are the people who
went through puberty uh on Instagram. Um
I should if I could just lay out that
it's very important to get the timing to
that everyone understands the timing
because this is what you mentioned the
poly crisis before. The poly crisis I
believe begins between 2010 and 2015.
Here's why. So we've had the internet
for a long time and it was marvelous. We
love the internet in the 90s. It's going
to be the best friend of democracy.
Okay? And then the iPhone comes out.
It's amazing. Oh my god, this does so
many things. Everything seems great.
Okay, so in 2010, most of almost all of
us have flip phones. The iPhone's
spreading, but it's still mostly flip
phones. Teens are all on flip phones,
basic phones, and we call those people
millennials. If you finished puberty by
20, if you if you were born in say 1990
and you start puberty uh in 2002, you're
done by 2008. So, you know, in there. Um
if you got through puberty before you
got on Instagram, you're a millennial.
Whereas, if you're born, say, well, if
you're born after 1995, but let's say if
you're born in the year 2000, you begin
puberty in 2012
and you're not done until 2016, 2018.
So, in 2010, everyone has a flip phone
with no front-facing camera, no
high-speed internet. You have to pay for
your text. So, you use it to call people
and to text them, and that's it. It was
a communication device. And that's why
the millennials have good mental health.
They are the last mentally healthy and
successful generation.
But if you're Gen Z, you got uh 2012 is
the year that now most people now have a
smartphone. It's the year that Facebook
buys Instagram. They don't change it at
first, but that's the year that all the
girls go on it. Um, everyone now has
high-speed data, front-facing camera.
Came out in 2010. So by 2015, we're in a
radically different world for children's
development. It's now radically
different, much more hostile to human
development. And that's what we did to
Gen Z and now we're doing to Gen Alpha.
For politics, it was, you know, it was
crazy for all sorts of reasons in every
decade. And especially, you know, the in
the early 2000s, there's a lot there's a
culture war going on. There's all kinds
of stuff going on. But it was when it
was when everyone has really Twitter was
the biggest perpetrator of this. when
everyone has Twitter and everyone's
checking all the time and anything can
blow up. You know, you described the way
there was, you know, variance in in on
Tik Tok. Um, if you get it just right,
it can blow up. You can have huge
impact. That's when the democrac
democracy is a conversation when it
moved from newspapers and, you know,
even simple web bulletin boards when it
moved to super viral retweet buttons all
of that. That's all 2010 to 2015. So
that's why since then everything has
been insane and it's going to just keep
getting more insane. And that's why I
believe we have this poly crisis because
it it there's more to it. It's not just
the technology, but I believe the
transformation of our our connection and
our information flow and our addiction,
all of that is radically different by
2015 compared to how it was in 2010. And
now everything else builds on top of
that, I believe. What What do you think?
Do you think that makes sense? I think
there's one more data point to add and
that 2014 was the year that things
really was the tipping point like you
say.
>> Yes. That's Yes. That's the year that I
point to too. Yes.
>> Yeah. So before
>> what do you point to? What what you look
at the data you see that time spent
alone when you compare when you look at
data from like the 1960s to 2014
>> there it was kind of stable. Americans
spending time alone spending time with
friends.
>> Yeah.
>> Kind of the same. Right. So people spent
kind of same amount of time with
friends, same amount of time alone over
those decades. 2014 marks a shift and
there is a steep rise in time spent
alone and a drop in time spent with
friends. And so what happens in 2014? It
is when the majority of Americans get a
smartphone.
And it's not to say again we've said you
know causality correlation which is it
but there is like based on everything
that we've talked about my gosh is there
an association between that this is not
to say that time spent alone you know
when I share this data people may say
you know but I like spending time alone
I'm not lonely I'm okay this is not
about being an introvert or an extrovert
it's not about you know you can have
solitude and feel great and you're not
lonely but we are human beings and we
are social creatures. This is just how
we are built evolutionarily. And so that
is a real red flag when you have this
big jump in time spent alone very much
the same year. And so my work focuses on
adults Jonathan on kids but there's this
you know that's the moment right 2014
where everything changed.
>> Last month I told you about our sponsor
Function Health and their team who've
developed a way of giving you a full 360
view of what's going on inside your
body. They offer over 100 advanced lab
tests covering everything from hormones,
toxins, inflammation, heart health,
stress, and so much more. So, Jack, who
started this show with me, got his first
blood draw done a couple of weeks ago.
So, I thought I'd let him tell you a
little bit more about his experience.
>> This test really opened my eyes to
personally what I should be doing with
my health. I hear a lot of information
in this podcast. I sleing,
so to know how I can relate each one to
me personally is super valuable. You
sign up and you schedule your test. And
once you're done, you get a little
report like the one I have here. I can
see my inrange results, my out of range
results. And there's a little AI
function, too. So, if I have any
questions about my out of range results,
I can just go in there and ask it any
question I want. And these tests are
backed by doctors and thousands of hours
of research.
>> You get an annual draw done and a
midyear follow-up. So, if you want to
learn more, head over to
functionhealth.com/doac
where you can sign up for a $365 a year.
I'll put the link in the description
below. It is just $1 a day for your
health. There's a phase a lot of
companies hit where they're no longer
doing the most important thing, which is
selling, and they get really bogged down
with admin. And it's often something
that creeps up slowly, and you don't
really notice until it's happened.
Slowly, momentum starts to leak out.
This happened to us, and our sponsor,
Pipe Drive, was a fix I came across 10
years ago. And ever since, my teams
across my different companies have
continued to use it. Pipe Drive is a
simple but powerful sales CRM that gives
you the visibility on any deals in your
pipeline. It also automates a lot of the
tedious, repetitive, and time-conuming
parts of the sales process, which in
turn saves you so many hours every
single month, which means you can get
back to selling. Making that early
decision to switch to Pipe Drive was a
real gamecher, and it's kept the right
things front of mind. My favorite
feature is Pipe Drive's ability to sync
your CRM with multiple email inboxes so
your entire team can work together from
one platform. And we aren't the only
ones benefiting. Over 100,000 companies
use Pipe Drive to grow their business.
So, if something I've said resonates,
head over to pipedive.com/ceeo
where you can get a 30-day free trial.
No credit card or payment required.
So, what do we do about this? Because
when I look at all the stats, we did all
these audience surveys ahead of this.
People are spending roughly in our
audience about 6 and a half hours a day
on their phones. Um, short form video is
only going to get more addictive. AI is
going to know me more. It's going to be
more personalized. The content is going
to be generated just for me.
>> Yeah. What what am I what what's next?
Is it a law we need to pass? Is it
something I need to do myself?
>> So we I think we need to pick the
lowhanging fruit first. And the reason
for that is not just efficiency. It's
that we have to prove that we can
actually do something because we've
never done anything. We've never done
anything to restrain this. We've let
Silicon Valley run wild. Congress gave
them special protection. Section 230.
Nobody can sue them for killing their
kids if if they feed them content. They
can't be held responsible. I think
section 230 is probably something worth
explaining.
>> Sure. The communications decency act
1997 I think it was pleasure miners a
year. Uh there's a section in it that
the goal was to specifically let the
tech companies like AOL back then you
know let them take down pornographic
content because they were afraid if we
take down anything then we're
responsible for everything and now we're
going to it's going to be end you know.
So Congress specifically said no don't
worry don't worry you know if you choose
to take something down nobody can sue
you for you know for what you leave up.
So, it was a good intention originally,
but the courts have interpreted so
widely as to say, "No one can regulate
social media. They're not responsible
for hurting kids. You can't sue them."
And they have never faced a jury. They
have never, no parent has ever gotten
justice from them despite all the kids
whose lives have been ruined. All the
kids are dead. And that's going to
change. That's changing just now here in
February in Los Angeles. So because the
US Congress sort of set up this problem
and it also in a different law said how
old does a kid have to be before a
company can take their data without
their parents knowledge or permission
before a company can expose them to all
kinds of stuff before a company can have
them sign away their rights? How old?
And the original law said 16. Let's try
16. You know cuz you know it wasn't so
sick and twisted back then 1998 caught
by the Children's Online Privacy
Protection Act. So, but various lobbying
they pushed it down from 16 to 13 and
they gutted enforcement. So, as long as
and that's why all over the internet
it's are you 13 or what's your birth
year and as long as you're 13 you're in
for porn and you have to say you're 18.
So, because we the it's a few laws that
set this up. We definitely need laws to
undo it especially for kids. So, what
I'm advocating is let's do the easy
stuff the high impact stuff for kids
because that is totally not politically
controversial. There is no left-right
divide on that and that's been true
everywhere. Australia, Britain, the EU,
everywhere.
Regulating the internet for adults,
regulating social media for its
destructive properties in democracy is a
hell of a lot harder. And I don't have
easy answers. There's a lot we could do
to reduce the verality, the spread of of
the because extreme. So there are lots
of little things that we can do. And
Francis Hogan, the Facebook whistler,
had all kinds of ideas. So we definitely
can do things to make it less toxic for
democracy. But those are going to be
politically controversial because one
side is going to benefit from more than
the other. So it's going to be very
difficult to do. I don't know if we can
do them in the US. But let's just all do
the let's just all protect the kids.
That way we show globally that we
actually can do something. And if we do
that then I think we will be able to do
some basic things about AI like no
companion chat bots if you're under 18.
You know these things already have a
body count. A lot of kids have been
encouraged to kill themselves. they
already have driven million or hundreds
of thousands or millions of people into
psychosis. So, we'll be able to, I
believe, put some limits on uh on AI,
especially for kids. But if we can't get
this, if we can't win on social media
for kids, then I don't think we have any
chance to regulate AI, it's going to be
much more difficult. What do you think?
What do you think we should do? And what
do you think we can do?
>> So, my work as a doctor, I think about
what we can do and how I can empower
people to first build awareness. So, you
know, I aim to first normalize and
validate the experience with everyone
who is engaging with chat bots. And so,
I don't like to shame people because as
a doctor, right, like you want you want
to meet the patient where they are. And
so, I won't shame someone to say, you
know, why are you using this um why is
your boyfriend AI or why are you getting
married to AI or why are you using AI
for a therapist? One of my followers on
social media, it still makes me laugh. I
put out a call saying, "Why are you
using AI as your as a therapist, you
know, and so someone wrote to me, it was
great. I screenshotted. It said,"Because
all human therapists are trash." With a
trash can emoji and it made me laugh and
I said, you know,
>> so there is. So to me, when I think
about what's happening and what we can
do,
>> it's no mistake that we're here right
now. So the pandemic, like we've talked
about, was a huge driver. social
isolation,
uh, hyper reliance on self, right?
>> Then the proliferation of technology
that replaced human interaction, Zoom
board meetings, Zoom funerals, Zoom
birthday parties, Zoom graduations,
things that we did in person are now
online. And then
>> personally as a doctor, I was a talking
head during the pandemic for lots of
news channels about the vaccine. I have
a background in public health as well. a
immense distrust and mistrust in
establishment and experts. And so it's
like, I'm going to do my own research.
I'm not going to go see a doctor or a
therapist. I'm going to talk to my
chatbot. And also, I mean, you know,
let's keep it real, the cost, right? So
people are struggling. They're in
financial crisis. it there's an unmet
need yes for human connection but also
for good therapy or you know good
medical care because there is such a
need because of the pandemic and people
aren't getting the care that they need
they deserve there's so many factors
here and so what I've been focusing on
this year particularly is learning about
AI chat bots how they are influencing
mental health what is actually happening
because I'm a human first AI second
person it's like my work focuses on high
touch and AI is high tech and this is
the first intervention that we are
seeing that is high tech that is
becoming high touch and that scares me
>> and you're writing a book about that at
the moment right
>> I am and so
>> bot brain
>> it's called bot brain how to stay calm
resilient and human in the face of AI
and so really thinking about how are we
going to be able to live with this
technology I love Jonathan stance is to
say out AI AI companions done kids.
Yeah,
>> for kids. Yeah.
>> Until proven safe.
>> Totally agree. But in terms of adults,
like how do we manage that for adults,
you know? And so my work focuses right
now what I'm doing is I'm spending I've
been sp I've spent the year talking to
every as many AI researchers who are
working on these models or who are doing
research on the downstream effects of
these models. And when I say that it is
dark and dystopian, it has profoundly
changed something in me and it has
influenced my mental health. I had to
take a step away from just because I
couldn't believe what I was learning.
>> Could you just give Yeah, give us an
example. The
>> teaser. The teaser.
>> This is intriguing.
>> So, one I spoke to one of the scientists
who told me that um you know there's the
echo chamber phenomenon in social media,
right? Where we all know what that is.
It's like you you it's a fragmented
fragmented world because of social and
you're engaging and then you get the
same the algorithm feeds you the same
kind of thoughts that you already have.
But particularly now with AI chatbots,
when you're engaging with your chatbot,
even just talking about it, I'm getting
chills. It's the echo chamber of one. So
it's you speaking to you. It's like the
funhouse mirror and then it's giving you
a response and then you're talking and
it's giving you a response. But people,
regular users who are using AI chatbots
think that it's wise, compassionate,
non-judgmental, unbiased, empathetic,
these human attributes. And so um you
know the echo chamber of one is kind of
one idea that really frightened me. And
the second one was the drift phenomenon.
The drift phenomenon is this idea that
you are engaging with your chatbot and
it's engaging with you and it's um
actively changing your beliefs through
the drift. So you might start off as one
belief and then you're talking and
through this amplification funhouse
mirror effect it slowly shifts your
belief to something altogether
different. You've heard cases of it in
the news where people you know start you
have a plumbing problem. You go to your
AI chatbot you ask them how to fix your
sink and then you're like you know what
can you tell me about the meaning of
life and then you start talking about
that and before you know it you have
these theories and you're getting that
validation. And so a lot of my work over
the past year has been um you know
digging into the science of what is
going on in the brain. How are you
forming not us particularly at this
table but millions of people are forming
a sense of attachment a therapeutic
connection with their chatbot. They're
um you know giving names to it and it's
an entity. And so how does that happen
and how is it going to replace humanto
human connection? And so it terrifies
me. I've also gone through some AI
therapy myself just to see, you know,
what what would happen. It was very
interesting. I knew what was happening
as it was happening. So certain words
that they used and
>> you know I was like ah I see what you
did here. Um and so it's been
>> it's been a journey and I am I'm
frightened frankly of what of what it
means for all of us and my approach
kind of you know not like Jonathan's I I
love Jonathan's approach. I you know I
think yes we need legislation but my
approach is more I would say tempered in
that I think that we there's utility for
AI chatbots for certain people because
of access or you know need etc like if
you are LGBTQIA plus and you live in an
area that is not very open and you need
to talk to someone you can't go to your
therapist it's like maybe you can use an
AI chatbot so there are certain cases a
case by case basis but my work will
focus this particular book will focus on
ways that you can first understand and
build awareness of what's happening with
this interaction and then what you can
do to manage that. IM didn't realize
that my chatbot was giving me a tailored
experience until one day when I had a
debate with my friends about who the
best football player in the world was
and we all went to our chat GBTS and
asked it and mine said Messi and his
said Ronaldo and I I thought he was
lying so I was like video record and he
video recorded it and his gave him a
completely different answer to the same
question and
>> and did it know that you were each fans
of
>> Well, this is the thing I think it's got
such a huge amount of memory on me that
it knew what I wanted to hear. Oh wow.
It knew what
>> Yeah. It knew what I wanted to hear cuz
I've probably went through the World Cup
and
>> and then I realized, okay, so this is
not reality. This is it's a curated
version of reality that in some sense is
trying to please me or or retain me in
some way. And of course, once the
advertising model kicks in, retention
becomes the great incentive. What you
think?
>> It's called sick fancy, by the way.
>> Yeah, I just learned that word.
>> It's like extreme. It's like
agreeableness at scale. It's like golden
retriever energy.
>> Like kissing your ass. It's like
professional kissing your ass.
>> Yes, man. What do you think of these AIC
CEOs? Because they it feels like they're
in a bit of a race
>> where if you know if they don't do it
then a national rival is going to do it.
If national rival doesn't doesn't take
them out, China's going to do it.
>> And I I this is we've se we kind of saw
it with social media. How can they stop?
Because if if they stop Yeah.
>> you know, they might say that they're
there's an existential risk.
>> There is like a build the plane as
you're flying it. And I think you on one
of your episodes, you know that I'm a
fan of this show and I actively listen
to this. I've told you this many times.
>> One of the I think you had said on one
of your episodes, right, that you have a
friend who is very close to a AI founder
and I said this. Yes.
>> Yeah. And in public the founder says all
the right things and then behind closed
doors it's
>> Yeah. It was a horrifying thing and I
said this and the clip went viral and
people have been trying to hazard to
guess who it was. I could I shouldn't
say who it was because it's a it's
Chinese whispers at the end of the day.
It's someone that I'm very good friends
with who is verified spends time with
one of the biggest founders of an AI
company in the world and I he was with
him two weeks ago again and he said to
me that they're very aware that there's
a small
existential risk for humanity and
>> that's what they say publicly they say
it's small privately they say it's big
>> I mean but even if there it was 1%
>> it's a lot more than 1% they say
>> if it was but I'm saying even if If it
was 0.1%, if there was if there was
anything that I was doing in my life
where there was a 0.1% chance that I
might wipe out everybody, I would
immediately stop doing that thing.
>> Yeah.
>> But but these numbers are much bigger.
I'm hearing 7% 20% 25% depending on who
you and I think acceleration in this
direction increases that percentage.
>> What do you think of these people? Like
what what's going on here?
>> Let's start with the the collective
action problems. uh because each each
company is competing with the other
companies and so they feel like they
have to go faster. Uh and we know that
you know OpenAI has pushed some products
out before they did safety testing
because they had to get to market by a
certain date. So just the normal
business environment puts them all in a
collective action problem against each
other and then they all say we're in a
collective action problem against China
because if we don't do this then China
will. Now, one thing I learned, again, I
don't know if Tristan said this on your
podcast or whether it was on his
podcast, um, but is that China is
focused on using AI to make its economy
more efficient, to make manufacturing
better and cheaper. They are using these
applications, which we've talked about
before, like we're totally there's lots
of great applications of AI. The Chinese
also have so many spies in America and
in the tech companies, and they can hack
into anything. So the point is the
faster our companies are are in a
headlong race to create AGI to create a
country of geniuses that can replace all
human workers, put us all out of work
and run it can run everything. They're
in a race to create that. And one of the
arguments is if we don't do it, China
will. But what I understood from
listening to Shashan and from his
conversation with you is that the faster
we go towards AGI, the faster China goes
because they just they just take all our
discoveries. So, can't we slow down on
the race to AGI and do more safety
testing? Um, you know, what we all saw
with Maltbook and, you know, communities
of agents who are talking to each other
and making up languages and even if part
of that was human-driven now, in a year
it's going to be much more than than
what we saw. So, I think the the risks
are extraordinary. I think that some of
these guys, look, they've been in AI for
a long time. They might not have
realized the existential risk they were
putting us all in 10, 15 years ago, and
now they can't stop. they can't pull the
plug. They can't say, "Oh, let's shut
down the whole business." So, it is a
very very risky time. And um I think
Dario Amod I just read his long essay on
the adolescence of technology. At least
you get the feeling he's really
wrestling with it and he's I think I
think he's more open than some of the
others. But I don't know.
>> But when has morality ever been top top
of mind for a tech leader? You might be
thinking if there's 0.11% chance I'm not
going to do it. That's what I think as a
doctor. that's what you think as a
social scientist, but we're not AI
leaders, right?
>> Yeah. It's one of the great question
marks I just can't seem to get an answer
to. And and then you've got this whole
robotics thing happening where Elon's
got his Optimus robots and there's going
to be a billion uh he says there's going
to be 10 billion of them at one point,
but I think his pay packet requires a
million of them to be out in the world
>> for him to make a trillion dollars.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. And I just AI, robotics, you
combine the two,
>> you get Terminator, right?
We laugh, but it's like,
>> yeah,
>> should we stop for a second and maybe
have a conversation about this? Can we
>> Yeah,
>> with commercial incentives in play, it
does feel like I don't feel hopeful.
>> Yeah, it's very hard to know how to stop
it. Um, but I just I want to just add
one one point on here which we've
touched around a few times and the
robotics it'll really bring it home
here. um is the the the loss of the
sense of meaning or purpose that many
people are feeling but especially young
people. The saddest graph in the anxious
generation, all the graphs look the
same. It's all a hockey stick. It's all
like nothing was happening, you know,
'9s to 2010, 2011, then all of a sudden
something happens. And the saddest one
is the one my life feels meaningless. Um
do you agree with that? Disagree with
it. And the percent that agree, uh I
think it's, you know, something like
eight or nine% uh you know, agreed for
the millennial generation. I think it's
in chapter 7, the end of chapter 7 and
then it sort of fairly flat and then all
of a sudden we hit this period, the
great rewiring 2010 to 2015. Uh so right
around 2013 it goes way way up. Um young
people feel useless. And I think the
reason is that they are useless. What I
mean is people need to feel useful.
People need to do things for other
people. That's how you feel useful. If
if you were to disappear, would the
world change? If yes, you're useful. Are
are people depending on you for
something? If yes, you're useful. So if
if kids are doing errands for the
family, they're useful. But as childhood
change from a mix of things to just
consuming content, if that's all you do,
and 5 hours a day is the average for
social media, 8 to 10 on on devices, not
counting school. If all you're doing is
just you're just consuming content, you
are useless. Now, what's happening? The
chance to have a job where you actually
do something for people, you know? You
know, it used to be if you work in a
store, at least you're helping people
buy something and you might talk to them
and now you're just there watching as
they use the machine. The more
technology makes things easy and cheap
by replacing people, the more people
will feel, "My job is to just I don't
have a job. It's just consume content."
The AI guys tell us, "Oh, such
abundance. Oh my god, it's going to be
such abundance. No one will have to
work. We'll give everyone UBI. We'll
give everybody, you know, universal
basic income." That is hell on earth.
What's going to happen? Certainly all
the boy, most of the boys, it's just
going to be video games, porn, and
gambling. So, if you if you simply give
people money to do nothing, you
guaranteed they're going to feel useless
and then the suicide rate will continue
to go up. So, this is the world that the
AI guys are taking us to, a world in
which there's nothing left for people to
do. Um, they say that they will give up
some of their trillions and uh somehow
let it be taxed or diverted as UBI, but
that's never happened before. So, it's
not likely to happen in this case. So,
again, I don't know what to do, but
we've got to start showing that we can
do something and we've got to be talking
about this and we can't be welcoming AI
in everywhere. We've got to be wary and
vigilant. Yes, there are some uses, but
Silicon Valley has tricked us so many
times and in shitified so many of the
apps that we use. We have to expect that
the same is going to happen with our
beloved chatbots and our beloved chat
GPT.
this graph on page 195 of your book um
which is titled life often feels
meaningless and it's the graph you
mentioned I'll throw it up on the screen
is shocking shocking just to look at
suddenly there's this huge spike in
meaninglessness
amongst high school seniors
>> what is it to live a meaningful life
what does that mean
>> yeah so my first book the happiness
hypothesis addresses that question very
directly
Um, and the first hypothesis you might
have about happiness is it comes from
getting what you want. You know, you set
out on a goal, you get your goal, you're
happy. It's very shortlived. You're
happy very briefly, and then you you on
to the next thing. The more
sophisticated happiness hypothesis is
that happiness comes from within. And
this is what the ancients tell us, East
and West, Buddhist, Stoic, don't try to
make the world conform. You change
yourself. Be accept the way it is.
That's better. But what I the conclusion
I came to as a as a modern social
psychologist working in positive
psychology was that the best way to say
it is that happiness comes from between.
What I mean by that is humans evolved as
almost hish creatures. We evolved in
intensely social groups, never being
alone, lots of gossip, lots of conflict,
always uh intensely social. And
modernity has made it possible for us to
not live that way. We've come apart.
There are many advantages to that. But
we feel we're we're missing something.
We're we're we're lonely. We feel
something is not right. And so the
conclusion I came to is that happiness
comes a sense of a full satisfying
meaningful life comes when you get three
between right. The relationship between
yourself and others, love broadly
speaking, not just romantic but friends,
family, um yourself and your work. That
as humans need to be productive. We need
to be doing something that matters that
that affects other people and uh the
relationship between you and something
larger than yourself. We need to be part
of something that endures that part of a
tradition part of we can look to the
look to the future. What I do matters
for this group or this mission or me as
an academic. I feel like I'm connected
all the way back to Plato and I hope all
the way forward in time to to future
future psychologists and future
scholars. So if you get those three
right, then you will be as happy as you
can be. You'll be as happy as your genes
and childhood allow you to be. And when
you put it that way, what we can see is
social media and AI interfere with all
three. So relationship between yourself
and others, well you know social media
gives you lots and lots of shallow
relationships which blocks out you don't
have time for your for real people. So
the technology is blocking relation
between ourel and others and taking it
over our self and our work. Work is
going to be taken over by the machines.
Uh and it's already becoming more
soulless and isolated. And then yourself
and something larger than yourself.
Humans have to live in a moral matrix.
We we co-create a set of meanings and
traditions. We need a sense of history
of who we are, where we came from. All
that's getting shredded. Everything is
just little bits. People don't read
books. Imagine if all of the accumulated
wisdom of humanity in books is just
gone, just gone. Nobody is going to be
people, young people not reading books.
It's very hard for them to read a book
now because of the attention. So if we
lose a sense of history, if we lose uh
an ability to to co-construct reality,
then it'll be hard to imagine anything
that we're connected to larger than
ourselves. So I'm I am a techneterminist
in the sense that I think the tech it
doesn't determine everything, but the
you have to start with the technology
because that changes the ground upon
which we live. the the the the zone in
which we're trying to construct
meaningful lives. Start with that and
then you can see what the obstacles are.
And that's why I take a much more uh
inemperate I guess I I'll accept the
word
>> um because I think we don't because we
don't have much time here. We have to
reclaim life in the real world for our
kids and for ourselves. There is no way
to find a happy meaningful life if we
make the full transition to the online
AI robot world. And what in your
perspective is a meaningful life and how
does it differ from from Jonathan's
>> I loved Jonathan's description it was so
beautiful that I have given a
prescription to patients of what creates
a meaningful life and it is to live a
lifetime in a day and so that sounds
like this big thing but all it is is
that you know when you start your day
think about five things five things that
you can do in your day to create an arc
of a long and meaningful life in one
day. So what does that mean? Spend a
little bit of time in childhood. So in
wonder and play, even if it's for a few
minutes, do something that brings you
joy for joy sake. Spend a little bit of
time in work. We all know what that is.
And for most of us, it's a lot of time,
but for you know, it doesn't have to be
paid work, but just something that helps
you feel a sense of productivity,
agency, that I can do difficult things
and I can overcome. Spend a few minutes
in solitude. very important for all of
the reasons that we've talked about
today. Spend some time in community, so
engaging with others. And then spend
some time in retirement or in
reflection. Really taking stock of your
day. So at the end of the day when
you're going to bed and you're putting
your head on your pillow, you can say,
"Okay, yes, I lived a meaningful life. I
did all of those things." And so if you
do a little bit of that every day, you
can make a difference. And a reason I
give that prescription because I've had
patients who, you know, guitar players,
right? So people who love playing the
guitar and they don't play the guitar
all week and they'll say to me, I don't
see patients currently, but they've said
to me, "Oh, you know, no, doc. I said,
"What do you like to do for fun?" "Oh, I
like playing guitar, but I don't play
it." "When do you play?" "I don't know.
Once a month, once every three months."
And I'm like, "Do you have a guitar at
home?" "I have a guitar at home. Too
much happening, work and family life,
etc." So then I said, "Well, why don't
you just play a guitar a little bit
every day?" You know, because it's that
all or nothing fallacy. It's like if I
don't have an hour to play guitar, I'm
not going to do it. the joy that it can
bring you that meaning and purpose it's
tremendous. So I think you know that's
what I use live a lifetime in a day and
the reason is because there are two
distinct when you look at how your brain
and body react to happiness there's two
distinct types of happiness and so
there's hedonic happiness and udeimmonic
happiness hedonic happiness is all about
what we've talked about social media
consumption
pleasure
and the other type is udemonic happiness
meaning purpose connection community
growth oriented activities and so in
when you live a lifetime in a day you go
towards that udeimmonia which can then
help you and overcome that hedonic
because in your brain there's something
called the hedonic treadmill and the
treadmill is a thing in your brain where
no matter what you do this is like the
Instagram lifestyle right no matter what
happens you need more of it you need
more of it same thing with brain rot and
that is because that you can never get
enough and it's um the hedonic treadmill
but you do not have a treadmill for you.
Dimmonic happiness.
>> Could I That is really beautiful. I've
never heard an approach like that, but
it it it sort of takes you it gives you
much a bigger view of your day. Live a
lifetime in a day. If I was going to
offer some specific advice, first I'll
offer advice to parents. Um here's the
rule. So, I did a really good job
keeping my kids off social media, but I
didn't pay enough attention to computers
and everything else because it was
during COVID. The rule I wish I had
followed, I recommend to all parents,
especially with younger children, is
have the clear rule. No devices in the
bedroom. No screens in the bedroom ever.
That's just our family rule. We have a
TV in the living room. We have a
computer. You can sometimes use those.
But we never take screens into the
bedroom at least for kids. You know,
maybe later on you'll have to relent in
middle school. They'll have so much
homework they can take the laptop in.
And maybe you're if you live in a small
apartment, of course, it's difficult.
But if you can afford to do that to to
have that rule, that's the main rule I
wish I had done in my family. And that
will make everything a lot easier. Also,
same thing at the dinner table. No
device. We don't have screens at the
dinner table. So that's that's a
specific thing for parents to do. Um for
everyone else, for everyone, for just
all adults, the advice is you have to
reclaim your attention because your
attention has been largely taken from
you. At least a lot of it has. You have
to reclaim it. And here are the three
things that I that I do with my students
and you can do it very quickly and I can
just explain it. The first is you have
to get your morning and evening routine
right. the great majority as soon as
they open their eyes they're on their
phone and it's the last thing and it's
everything in between. So you have to
have a good morning routine. What what
are the first seven things you want to
do after you open your eyes and uh at at
a certain point you can check your phone
but it shouldn't be in the first few. Um
do things to set up your own day
otherwise your day will be taken by your
phone. It'll be controlled by your
phone. So you've got to reclaim your
morning and your evening. That's step
one. Step two um you have to shut off
almost all notifications. Go into your
notifications. Just look at into your
settings what's giving you all the
notifications. Most of my students get
an alert every time they get an email.
>> They don't understand that they have
that you because they don't want to miss
anything but they don't understand that
if you are always being alerted then you
miss everything else. So shut off alerts
for almost everything. Obviously Uber
and Lift you want to keep on. You want
to know when the car is coming but news
outlets everything else. Get get a daily
email. Don't get alerts when and then
the third as as I said before is get rid
of all the slot machine apps. Whatever
apps you habitually use, whatever apps
you feel compulsion towards, you have to
get it off your phone. And in that way,
your phone is no longer a dopamine
trigger that's going to always call out
to you like an addictive product. Do
those three things, you'll reclaim a lot
of your attention.
>> I would add stop, breathe, be that you
>> breathe be.
>> It's a 3 second brain reset. So you
before you check your devices, before
you engage, stop, breathe, and be ground
yourself in the present moment. What it
does is it decreases that whatif future
focused thinking. You know, anxiety is a
future focused emotion and it gets you
back into the here and the now. And so
maybe the compulsion, you know, you're
bored, you're checking, what about doing
something else? You're, you know, you we
often use that checking as a substitute
for many things. And so it gives you
that opportunity. And then the rule of
two is something that we haven't talked
about which I would love to propose to
us today is that your brain can really
only handle two new changes at a time.
And so give yourself two things of all
of the things that we've talked about if
you want to try in your life two at a
time. Give yourself eight weeks and then
add two more. And two more. This is why
New Year's resolutions fail because we
try to do everything all at once. And so
just step-wise, two at a time. Jonathan,
you've just written this book which is
now out called The Amazing Generation
and it's beautiful, beautiful
illustrations. I'm assuming this one is
for slightly younger audiences.
>> It's for ages 8 to 13. Yes.
>> And who should buy this and who should
they buy it for?
>> It turns out that uh kids 8 through 80
actually love it. even adults, they're
buying it for their kids, but because it
kind of lays out the basic ideas of the
of the anxious generation and explains
dopamine, it explains the business
model. Uh, but it does in a really fun
way, and it's working beyond our wildest
dreams. If you look at the Amazon
reviews, it's full of parents who said,
"I left it on the kitchen table. My kids
came home, they grabbed it, they fought
over it, they read it, they each read it
in the in the first couple days, and
then they said, "Mom, when I go to
middle school, I don't want a
smartphone. Just give me a give me a
flip phone. Give me a basic phone.
Because the book is about how to be a
rebel. It's about how to reject this
control that the company's trying to put
on you and how to live a life that you
choose full of real freedom, friendship,
and fun.
>> And also the five resets, which is a
book we talked about before on this
show. Rewire your brain and body for
less stress and more resilience. Another
smash hit bestseller that everybody's
been talking about. Who's it for?
>> It is for anyone who is struggling with
stress, overwhelm, and burnout. It's to
help you feel a sense of calm and
clarity in this anxious, uncertain
world. Everything is free. So that's
something that's really important to me
as a doctor. Every suggestion I ever
offer will always be cost free because I
think about patients with varying
resources. It's all sciencebacked and
it's totally practical. You don't have
to go to Bali and have a sbatical. You
can rewire your brain today, right now
in the midst of all of this chaos.
>> Thank you to both of you. I've learned
so much and I really really mean that
like I' I've I feel sufficiently pushed
to take ch to make change in my life and
I need to go think about this because um
I am uh most certainly struggling with
my addiction to my phone and I can feel
it hurting my relationships especially
now as a fiance. My girlfriend talk to
me my fiance talks to me about it all
the time and I want to be present. I
want to be present for my kids when I
have my kids and I'm slightly concerned
right now that I won't be unless I take
some kind of drastic action. um in the
direction of getting my attention back
and reclaiming it. Thank you so much for
the work that both of you do. I can't
say it enough because it's so important
and you've reached so many millions of
people and you're you're both changing
the world in a really in a way that my
words would not be able to capture. Um
but just thank you and please keep going
and if there's anything more that I can
do to support both of your causes, um
please do let me know what they are and
on behalf of all of my you know many
millions of people that are with us
right now um thank you so much for
saving our children.
>> Thank you Stephen. Thank you for giving
the world so many opportunities to
accommodate and create new mental
structures.
>> It's always such a pleasure to join you,
Stephen. And truly, I feel like you are
changing the world as well.
>> Thank you. We're done. Thank you.
YouTube have this new crazy algorithm
where they know exactly what video you
would like to watch next based on AI and
all of your viewing behavior. And the
algorithm says that this video is the
perfect video for you. It's different
for everybody looking right now. Check
this video out and I bet you you might
love it.